ELM1NDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. 'Semester, $4.00 One Year, $7.50
i Offices: ¡ = Saved: E1 I I I Ttl. 632 P. O Be" 345 |
DAILY TIDE.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO II
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
SATURDAY i$ JANUARY 1*20.
ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER, FEBRUARY 21,
l "M9, AT THE POSt OFFICE AT SAN JUAN, PORTO
Ni MI RO 277.
RICO, INDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3.
More "bolshevikis" sent to Ellis Island. Japan releases German prisoners.
Taltemte with Mr. i Sewell about the i present conflict t " : . " 1 Tétala no tay esparauas da taire I® 1 i , - the four tu ■ , stfe-aga i AtaHtal" eon Mr. Sewell and "MjÁjo qiM ím employees of the | Cotapaitia were unfair in their claims, as they are all well paid, work regu 1 lar hours and receive good treatment from the Coin, i pañia. Referring to the presentation of the list of demands to Mr. Cryder, he denies that the workers' delegation was ungraciously received, and affirms, on the contrary, that they were duly attended to. What happens," said Mr. Sewell, "is that the workers believe everything they are told by their agitators and allow themselves to be carried away by them, giving rise to unpleasant incidents which may be detrimental to the public. In spite of the affable reception we received, Mr. Sewell showed us great circumspection. He expressed to us, i ^that he did not wish to give stir to this ; affair. He showed a generous desire to normalize the situation, as the workers, he said, understood that the situation was growing, "Mr. Sewell's attitude and his words seemed to us to be not very favorable to a speedy settlement of the conflict. We left our visit with the pleasant impression that our interlocutor had communicated to us that there would be no major interruptions in the electricity and power service. A MOMENT OF SENSATION At three o'clock yesterday afternoon the city of San Juan believed that the dreaded moment of the suspension of the electric power, which moves the industries and gives light to the population, had arrived. At that hour the light and the power were suspended for a long time, and for that reason a certain panic was produced in the inhabitants of San Juan. The streetcars stopped running, as well as the engines of all the workshops. This interruption lasted for about an hour. We telephoned the general office of the tramway company and were told that the interruption would only last a few minutes. At about four o'clock the tramway traffic was resumed in the city, and the work in the workshops was also normalized. i CONSIDERATIONS ON THE STRIKE It can be observed in this strike of electricians, how the workers are getting used to exercising their rights in due form, that is to say, it can be observed together with the courageous protest a spirit to discuss the different aspects of the controversy. It is natural that if one adopts this attitude one is already at the starting point of a fair settlement for all the disputing parties, since men sometimes fail to understand when a true sense of justice is at stake.
Panama tries to erect a monument á Lesseps (By French Cable) - ■*MBím** - % - , .* * - y Trna translation filed with the Pout master at San Juan, January or !' h ¡ ¡ 1919, of the following cablea as required by See. 481 1|2 B P. L. * The National Assembly of Panama unanimously voted a credit of fifteen thousand dollars for the construction at the Place de France of a monument in honor of Lessenps and his companions, forerunners of the great inter-oceanic work. The public subscription has produced important sums. The Franco-American Committee in Panama has addressed all the nations of the Continent requesting their support for the monument, which will be an irrefutable proof of the friendship that has always united America and France. PARIS, 9.-The newspaper "Le Petit Journal" informs that the inter-allied headquarters, which is at Versailles, will be transferred to Verdun or Metz. CAIRO, 7.-There is great agitation in the Italian colony on the occasion of the death of an Italian musician by an English soldier. The Egyptian agitators are trying to give the matter a political character. .... i PARIS, 9.- The liner j "Lorraine" has left hov for New York harbor. BASEL A, 9.-The Munich newspapers pay great tribute to the former King of Bavaria on the occasion of the 75th anniversary of his birth. Ila seriously wounded ea Hanacao Escape of a criminal. (BY TELEGRAPH.) Humacao, January 9- ' THE WORLD, San Juan. ' Hby, at ten forty-five ¡ o'clock this morning, there was a collision between í des railroad cars of Senor j . Roig. He was seriously injured tra. Felipe Rodriguez was seriously injured. Taken ¡ ; to the hospital, it was found that he was mortally wounded. i -The prisoner Víctor Gómez Peúrasa ¡ escaped from the works being carried out on the road leading to the pia ■ ya of Humacao. I Santiago Z. Maunez. Correspondent.
OíNE LUNA i Lunea, tero 12, 1920. * Sensational Premiere L, MAfctDlEZ & co. Pr tantán a i XTOffiB BBtVA y I * i WRAIOHTOM HALE j in the seMtefetal film production | .... wMaRráfica I 13". ■ ■> , E
HOMAGE TO PERSHING The Governor of Missouri, Mr. Gardner, reading at General Pershing's residence, the document in which the illustrious military man is informed that he has been presented with gold medals by the inhabitants of Laclede, Pershing's native town. -Photo. Underwood and Underwood.
A vessel sunk with her crew in the Mediterranean TOLON, 9^- Anyg^ja, "L 4iaufragio 3eT large French tug "Pluvier". which was bound, for C'.ttaro. The entire crew is missing, believed to have perished by drowning. ELLIS ISLAND IS FULL OF REDS WASHINGTON. 9.-Forty-three persons, declared anarchists and "bolshevikis*'. were taken today. by numerous police roadblocks, protected by troops, to Ellis Island, where they will be embarked at any moment for various Russian towns on the Baltic coast. The police have received energetic instructions to destroy as many offices and conspiratorial centers of the "Soviets" as exist in the Republic. PARIS. 9.-The Commission of Allied and German experts held two meetings. All the details on which there seemed to be disparity were agreed upon, in order to put into effect the Treaty. The result will be so- t meted to the Supreme Council, which will meet tomorrow under the pre- ■ sidency of Clemenceau, and will be attended, probably,' ( Nítti and Lloyd George. The diplomatic meetings will be held next Sunday; and Marcilly, Chargé d'Affaires of France in Berlin, will leave soon for Berlin. Baron Von ' > Lersner, President of the German Delegation, will present his credentials to the President of the Republic, Mr. Poincaré. i Lis Gamaral Festivities i -- Ayr r at four o'clock in the afternoon the persons inrrtawias i by Mr. Todd to combine the festivities of the coming Carnival met in the meeting hall of the Town Hall. [A committee was appointed consisting of Mr. Roberto H. Todd, pre ; ; ; skiente; Emilio S Jimenez, Juan Hev- > uández Lopez and William Walsh, vice. | Iriarte Jr., secretary; and members Miguel Such, Damián Mor" j serrat, Miguel Ferrer. J. R. Qmño- ' res. R. Staea, Angel Sifre, F- C. HoL í mes. Juan J. Gallardo. Mr. Shanton and each of the directors of l is pe ! Irradíeos de San Juan. At the proposal of Mr. Holir.es. it was agreed to invite the officers of lea
ALAITIIANT SITUATION IN THE SOUTHERN HUELGUISTS ACCUSED OF INCENDIARIES I - cul<>no> dm :a oarte sur "le ia in the vecanAd of Vaneo and Gaán:ca have been igraadewente alarm de- üerante Lis Lumas veíate and that * tra hours, debútala ios frequent m cendios that have jpemdo occurring in i-s p.These fires, according to some of the cane-^s. c oLn-^s. must be considered as a part of the cane that is being stored there, the number of which amounts to several thousand. The warehouse déf íerraízar and o no of the deposits of Já central ' 9cata Ei -a were destroyed by the f&ego. Li- Ardidas fell ularly in 830 OOd. Other stgios fires have been nitor mitlcs rlttiB? irente .aendo .aendo the worst of ede: one that destztyó hundred cnerdas of cane. The eoloany fear that if au mini.; the spirit of deduce ion among the agricultural workers-. the situation may >? gar to create estarlo tenerai ¿e in: canquílidad and tUma Reserves of pol.. its have been in vitda^ at the site of ios events It is believed that tí Colonel Bhaztau will take charge ll.Pl return to. his e tado wormal. So far, a number of Hnelguiites have been arrested, who are believed to have been involved in these Zaalicic fires. The situation is iiannante for the settlers. The workers of the "Car eke" sugar mill in Vega Baja have also gone on strike, for which the protection of the police has been requested, although up to now the Hungarians are acting peacefully. Anache ss aggravated Govemulor Yager It was precise aHmimcMsalli It NWns The hcnorar'e Governor Yager, who for-ie tu-- -' two days has been ill a .ausa of an intestinal affection! s. . ¿-'-avó yesterday at four o'clock in the tari-, "i? so alarmingly, that " i his family physician, Dr. Gut:érr"'Z Igaravídez. considered necessary a consultation <ie faculta ' On that occasion were called to : consultation to the Fortress Drs. Glines and Del T -ro. purely to study the case together with Dr. Gutiérrez and Ij-aravaler! The private secretary of the Govcr ; nador. mr. R xirígwez. so prent-." "the eravedMl of the sick was accentuated. i notified all i >s Heads of Departa ' f mentó, the Presidents of the Senate ¡ i and of the House and all other ■ high government officials. j As we write I these lines, high bans of the nseiie. ¡ ericoutral&n t-n the palace of Santa : Catalina Messrs. Miller. Staea Pa Czech. Benedict. K. Baldan*, Judge : Wolf, of the Supreme^ Mrs. Shanton and several officers of the Regiment of f Puerto Rico. I We regret sincesaanently the eni ferment of the eni ferment of the Island's prisaerp authority, and make vota" for its full ; reestablishment | ■ American destroyers who travelitaón our port rare to attend the CarnavaL festivities At the next assumption will be fixed | the days on which they are to rrkbwi . the festivities- - t Dr. Gomes Priaau selaeitó ■ at the meeting that read late leftovers of les festejo* JMna tatritaídos lent" the asociaeüioe* benéfiufi of San Joan.
Violent attacks on German ex-chaudiil Ludendorff (By French Cable) 4-^" W - T. - - - . Trno 1 -mirtina 1M wtth Iba Peal ' nsasíer at San Juan, estero on t "ith 1919, of the fcUooring es hies as reqair "d by See. 4£1 12 B P. L A ta*. 1*11. BASEL. 9.- Professor Enrentsberg. of the University of Heildelberg. sharply rebuked General Ludendorff, stating that the tactics of the Germans were simply a copy of the tactics of the Allies and especially of the French. JAPAN RELEASES GERMAN PRISONERS NAGASAKI. 9.-Two transport ships of the Japanese Imperial Navy have left this port, carrying two thousand three hundred and fifty Germans, who had been hitherto prisoners of war of the Japanese army, by virtue of having surrendered to the Nipponese when the latter seized the Germanic fortress of Kiao-Chau. Many Japanese women, married to Teutonic soldiers, are also on the ships. In the coming week two more transports will sail, carrying the rest of the Teutonic military prisoners of war, numbering a little over 5,000. PARIS. 9.-The first concert organized by the Opera Staff Strikers was a resounding success. The event was attended by thousands of spectators. HOUSE OF SPAIN Section of San Joan CONVOCATION ! Ea r-fliuíiH "e lo Merwi Jjaaa 1m rM-h" ñe mrnr*orRtiáu de la Saciedad ca sa articala paragraph ,*a^ aa com vaca a lea Sras. besieged de - this os<saisme laca! a Jbdte fiaa.mil orttoaria q. teadeá effect d demiago lldemmn 19" a las 3 ñe fe m 1a sala de actos del futo ^fipfieL| Ea said icouMm se usmhatñ Jauta । ^niHCtiva for ada 19" and spAtagaa:iáu lea lirirgiiss a la AaapBfea GeCbmtral. 'j fita Jara. F. R. Efe. 31. 1919. . I The Fr-iali üli fui, j JOSE Ka. DEL VAIXE fita. I
 Nu "*o.- Fob Underwood and Under"-v~od.
PARIS. 9.-The exchange of ratifications for the immediate entry into force of the Treaty of Peace will take place tomorrow at the Quay d'Orsay, office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The document by which the reduction of the German tonnage is required, will be sent to the German Delegation. simultaneously with the exchange of ratifications. PARIS. 7.-A ceremony was held at the Sorbonne in honor of the professors mobilized during the war. The President of the Republic. Mr. Poincaré, delivered an eloquent speech praising the soldier-teachers who gave such a high example of intrepidity and self-sacrifice. ZUR J7H (Su-za). 9.-A Berlin "sportman" has bought the yacht "Hohenvpüern", which belonged to the Kaiser. The sale was stipulated at two million marks. PARIS. 9.-The Council of Ministers will fix on Tuesday, in all probability, the program of taxes, from which seven thousand million francs are expected to be obtained. 1 PARIS. 9.-"Le Matin" > - । blica a telegram from Cervera stating that a state of war has been proclaimed throughout Catalonia. PARIS. 9.-The Labor Administrative Commission heard Mr. Jouhaux's report and unanimously approved the efforts of the Labor delegation which took part in the international conference in Washington. ---- : Fnjo ea bs camrates The Chief of the ñe Sahzmt Graa cp irsurautié yesterday the "j "Aciche 2 the S. ea the catoaia "Lita' , declare inr-iia in tes ' cane fields, quen.áiriose "iiez ■nnerlas ñe cane. The made faé <~i*Twriir-~ lawstigiaíw i nriLíma" unite ea caassa ñe - ta detectives Caatra arrests made i hay. - EXISTENCE IN THE ( AJ A MUNICIPAL E ¿sa lo. of the current ñaháa ( Cea that had saificaente jara rvediñear the teati*. P®ra coaatrair. almost, ae rds firio Eii:miei*al qae did not affect the (Ja i jza of Balctatay. j
The new offensive confia ios food speculators Mr. Martia will come out aaiasa for tes and other ¡¡sanas á íia of tasr that imstijaciáa "i Coru- ; ■ ■ ■ ■ ■- 4- - - - - - - -i- - J - ■ ¿1 * - - - ' - ■ J J' ■ - - _ - " ' J r T: '- z ' ' ' '"- i * b :: j" ? ♦ .< r * " - - - - - T®"wat. <wtar - ¡"i^ waaqn." V. íi. - i- ... : 3. ■■ ? 4 c-- >- ■ . _ - J. -. - :- -- -- j ■ >- j n-uiio-, - - - - - . ■ ' - - t - - - _ í a * or - - -- - j * * , rryw: - 7*Tj*.ri' ir,- ■<:.*. r. . ? lai¿aóo - . --z- - - ¿ró. *-i t ^2- * q¡J. i i-Jar-'-i - -- M r_ La ... I - ' a *" - * ' rr"- hzb' ■■ - 1 ■ - - - \ :i ■ ■ Ir'L.fO' ■ £ ' " ? - "-s y a ¿ir w.o- . -a a J - c- . i- ta lit-ra. 7 . i - - - .art"; A xl.jner- .... y - a i jen y" - r.a"' r-*-vái 'Ixi í :-/ ■. .j .■uuJlú.-ja TODAY- Premiere at Pío. Rico TODAY ALICE BRADY AND BANK MAY in the íclenso drusa in 5 parts THE TRAP OJO? OJO! M AMANA*DOMINGO BSTREHO EX PUERTO RICO MATIKAL T COCHE HELEN GEROME BKAD1 v KENWTH HARLAN in the colasal Ama in 6 fiaztes U NILA HENUU PCB LA TABns "LAS GARRAS DEL LE09T j PBEEBM r-m