ELWNDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Somantan, 9<J0S A afta, 97.94.
Office": Snivarior Brau. 91 í T "l. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR II |
| SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
fablisheé and distributed under permit (lio. 801) authorized by *b¡F i Aet of oetober S. 1017. on Slo at the Post Office at Jaan. PusUf Rirn Bv order of the President, A. 8. Burleson. Poat "ens¡tar GeneSm-
Entered a" second daos matter, febraary >1, 1 Ht. I at the Boot OfUe at San Jaan, Porto Bieo. (United I St atee of America) under the Act of march S, 187" J
[ JABADO MAY 22, 1920.
NUMBER 390.
Discovery to combat the 'ermatization' of sugar cane.
At the request of Rafael del Valle Zeno, a Puerto Rican agronomist, author of the discovery against the sugar cane d" y disease, the Department of Agricul I tara do Puerto Rico, held a meeting yesterday, during the morning at the Experimental Station of Rio Piedras and in the afternoon at the Department's own office in San Juan, which was attended by the following persons: Don Mamó* Gandía Córdova, snb-Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture and Labor; Don Federico Legrand, Chief of the Negociado de Agricultura; Mr. F. S. S., Chief of the Negociado de Agricultura. F. S. Rarle, Pathologist; Mr. Francisco Lo POg pontin^nea, Chemist and Inberino Director of the Experimental Station of Rio Piedras; Mr. Enrique Gonzales, cen trgRsta; Mr. Julius Matz, pathologist; Dr. Rafael del Valle Sárraga, Chemist, Director of the Department of Sani ty; Licdo. Ramírez Santibañez, Public No- ( tart and Mr. Conrado Asenjo. At that meeting, at which there were several discussions, all scientifically based, in relation to this matter, the following agreements were reached: To proceed as soon as possible, and as soon as the preparations which are so indispeBaghto" allow, to the experimental and scientific tests which may prove in a convincing manner that the discovery of Mr. del Vatio Zeno is true. That these tests be carried out by a committee composed of the following persons: Mr. Lopez Do Mingues, Acting Director of the Rio Piedras Experimental Station; Dr. Gutierrez Igaravidez, Bacteriologist; Dr. Enriqua Gonzalez, centralist; Don Bdnardo Gtorgetty, and two representatives to be designated by the great central stations of Guanica and Fajardo. - T amynM etMMMfartilcte committee pfeh I cede?, aeráa the following: la.-Aptioar to several strains of cane ] healthy (whose number was fixed at : ctnsaenka), te the varieties susceptible" to enformedid- as "Cristal!- 1 1 na" and "Rayada", that creacaa in the soil you acid reaction, after cor- ] hadas, as one and a half pounds of sui 1 teto do ammonia to 25 per 100 p i each, around their roots, pa- 1 to verify that after a certain time will arise in them the disease known by the name of 'tinged' or "yellow stripes". 2a.-Apply to several vines of healthy canes (whose number has been fixed at fifty) and of the same variety as Utóriores, growing in arid soil, after cutting, and after having protected their roots with pulverized carbonate powder incorporated into the soil, equal doses of the same substance, in order to verify that these vines will not acquire the "yellow streaks". The lapsa da Rompo in both cases ■-ré the same, opto is. if in the strains , treated with ammonia sulfate without the limestone it is verified at the end of cler , time, that the authentic "shading" arose and in that same time it com proves that it has not arisen in the ce- , pas/protected with the limestone, the tests pan the effects of this compro- , Ration, so will be terminated. The amount of lime carbonate to be used, its origin, etc., will be determined by the Zeno Valley senior. The trial period will be six months, but the failure may be discontinued as soon as the appearance of disease in the ammonia-treated strains is ascertained. The determination of the acidity of the ammonia sulfate, etc., and other details of correct technique, are left to the expertise and good faith of the chemists involved in these tests. Per tos Señerq" that integrate the Qomité quo girarte periodic and frequent visits to the "ampo of experimentation. He sefior dti Valí" Zeno requested and it was agreed by all those present, that once the test is proven by the "start nriementA its decahoteia^to, an esrUfieate tanate per tos atembo" te said Expert Committee be granted, and refúndate by the Oondsionado de Agricuitur* fio Puerto Rico. . It Mnaga, of the Department of Moldade, biso tas sL guicntos woctawa. that fnsroa approved as aaigttaaMa to the tests d" "M Js. He**)
The second Industrial Fair will be held at the end of July.
By the "Federación Portorriqueña i del Trabajo" the following circular letter has been addressed to the Public Service Commissioners: I "On the 25th, 26th and 27th of July next, the Second Industrial Fair will be held in Bayamon in which we will exhibit articles and products of Puerto Rico, both industrial and agricultural, animals and curiosities of all kinds. Each municipality has a separate location to set up the installation with the effects and products that they bring to each locality. We believe that each municipality should appoint a commission to take charge of the effects that the industrialists wish to exhibit and that this commission should be in charge of conducting and exhibiting in the best manner the effects that are entrusted to its custody. The expenses of that commission should be defrayed out of municipal funds in the same manner as was done last year in some of the municipalities which placed their facilities at our first fair. ' We hope that you and the other re > . presenters will second our ¡ patriotic work and that you will exhort the in- i dustrialists and farmers to con- j currate with their products to our ex- i position. In the suit brought by Robert Sildorff against George Frantman and Eduardo Acha, in the Federal Court, for malicious prosecution, after the trial had been in progress for four days, the jury retired for deliberation, bringing in a verdict in favor of the plaintiff shortly afterward, for $100,000, and the plaintiff brought an action for damages against the defendants for malicious prosecution, claiming $25,000; basing his claim on the grounds that the plaintiff's claim was based on the following grounds.000; basing the suit, on the ground that on or about the 1st day of February, 1919, the defendants appeared before the District Attorney of Ponce, and maliciously and without cause to justify it, filed an indictment against the plaintiff, for an alleged false representation, on a certain contract which was executed in the said city; he further alleges that he is agent for Edward G Marshal and Minor C. Kith, both of Philadelphia, and that he had received a considerable chastity of goods, valued at fifty thousand dollars, from the defendants, in which sum the plaintiff, in conjunction with another, had defrauded Frantman and Acha. The said Prosecutor gave notice to the Chief of Police of San Juan, so that he could immediately arrest the plaintiff, who was obliged to give bail of three thousand dollars, in order to obtain his freedom; later, the case was dismissed for lack of evidence; that this matter was given great publicity, forming, of course, appreciations against his reputation, which influenced his business. The plaintiff estimates that he has received damages of $25,000, and asked the Tri banal for a verdict in his favor, for the aforesaid sum. WHILE THE CLEANING ' OF THE STEAMER 'BRAZOS' LASTS Another steamer of the same corporation "N. Y. and P. R. A. A.," which will replace the steamer "Brazos" during the duration of the cleaning of the latter at the Brooklyn docks. According to reports, the "Brazos" will enter the dock on her next trip north. ...until I" féeha, te "M. Y. and P. BA A Oo." does not know the name of the steamer which will replace the "Brazqe"; but, he says, it will be one of those making the voyage from the United States to Cuba and Mexico, among her targets being the "Mote" Caatia", the "Bunter-Holl", the "SaWt^a", etc. We aaegnran that tedas these are fast baques, and very eémoENEDDTA M- DE TORO In the next viaj" del Marín" jto- - te W te "RNte <" don tetto Toro Fecaáader.y se fbmílii, quieps" come to fix their rosideneto here per a>"Én tftoMi.
THE RIOT OF THE MIEROKES IN PUERTA DE TIERRA
if ; :l - L. ® 'I' j W >- i
: moulin Jaime Martinez and Jovito Poul, testifying before prosecutor Diaz Collazo. Es ' tos individuals were attacked by the ¡ strikers in the Miranda neighborhood on
Wednesday, and when the police arrived, a riot broke out between the latter and the strikers, resulting in one death and several wounded.
In the photograph appear the chiefs of public order, Messrs. Schettiui and Qui ñones; also the young Jesús Díaz, stenographer of the public prosecutor's office.
THE TRUTH OF WHAT HAPPENED IN BALLA JA - 1 Statement that Lieutenant G Sapia will give before the "Board" assigned by Colonel Jarvis of the Regiment.
The following is submitted to us for publication: ! "Lieutenant Sapia is assigned to Co. "F" and was ordered to take temporary charge of Co. "A", due to the illness of its Company Commander, Lieutenant Torres. Company "A" is firing at the white at the Escambrón, together with the other companies of the First Battalion, to which Lieutenant Sapia has never belonged, as he has always been assigned to Co. "F". On Tuesday morning Lieutenant Sapia went to the Escambrón ¡ and sat in a chair in the field house assigned to the Company Com- í mandar of Co. "A". It was the first time he went to Company "A"; and he did not know anyone. He sat in the chair all day, without speaking, for the Non-commissioned Officers of "A" are very efficient, know how to perform their duties and maintain great discipline in the Company. The firing was completed that day at about 4:00 P. M. and each Officer retired. M. and each Officer retired to his home. After the Officers retired, Captain Rodriguez, who is in charge of the "Firing line", said to Lieutenant Sapia: "tomorrow, Lieutenant, you will go to the PIT (The PIT is the part where the targets are). Sapia replied to Captain Rodrigues: "Very well Sir", and left in a gua ! gua towards Bailajá. On Wednesday, the day of the event, Lieutenant Sapia could not be with the Company, as he was in the pit. In the afternoon, when the shooting was over, all the Officers who were in the Escambrón went to Ballajá. Lieutenant Sapia went to the Club, and there he saw Colonel Jarvis, Major Field, Captain Parra, and Lieutenant Moreno talking in a get-together; and as it was a "high, ranking officers" get-together, he retired and went to Company A^ where he had to go to sign some pápete". When he had finished signing, he said to First Sergeant Risueño: "Sergeant, Mucktt rB "M-ta "lgiS Iterados a Huicao (By Telegraph) Humacao, April 21. EL MUNDO, San Juan. Steamer "Cornelia** unloading with dificulta (tas The "Marina'' has brought mneboe breaks strikes. 150 tra bajad r>res ealfin on firm strike deed" twenty-six days ago," A ^KALDONfidbó. ' * RE ACHtAVA LA WTUACTMr. HA EB "kLLLADQ QT&A HUELOA IN LOP MUELLES MBQY<XEKQQF08 AlgMte* houses do coméate <e San Joan néíbteron yesterday rihlsfiismee co , "tatettMe" "WkM" shippers and estL hadare" fie Ja" mertte de Nnev" York have tawiilsdu in hnriga.
Have the companyMsta for tomorrow se-1 | guir with the shot, To which the j ! sergeant replied. Yes, my lieutenant: everything will be co- ' of this my shot rang out, and^Lieutenant Sapia! said to the Sergeant, "Look to see who i ; is the man who came from the shot with a ■ I bullet in the Rifle, and in making * * * inspection arms ' ' ' tion here, he has missed an i shot. The Sergeant moved toward the ; door, and as he took two steps, another i : shot rang out. Then Lieutenant Sapia said: i - "This man must be a descui-1 ¡ given, Sergeant. Go see what is going on, i i i And he rose from his chair and followed Sergeant Risueño, who, as he opened the door, a bullet hit close to him. Then, ( i he, Company Clerk and Sergeant Saí pía, placed a chair behind the door and the lieutenant asked for a rifle; but there was no rifle in the office, nor a pistol either. The Company Clerk, still hearing the shots, ran, and in doing so knocked over the chair, and the door was held together. The lieutenant approached the i wall and searched with his eyes for something with ' : which to arm himself and attack Private Padi- ¡ । lia, but found nothing. Then he said to the Sergeant, "Go away, Sergeant, j out of ta window, I'll stay here: ' and if he comes in, I'll hit him with this chair," , T a chair beside him." But the ( Sergeant 1c replied, "No, my lieutenant; i stay; you go. Then the ¡ lieutenant jumped out of the window and called । to the guard, from a very I narrow wall, where he was éb- standing. Colonel Jarvis and Major Field were playing golf near by, and the Colonel, feeling the firing and seeing the tomento Sapia in that place, asked him what was the matter; replying "1 tenien- - te: "It seems that a Co. ' 'A'' man has gone mad and is firing shots at every one he sees." Then the Colonel entered the Club, with Major Fitid. From the third floor of Ballajá they threw two sheets to Lieutenant Sapia, but he refused them, and then they threw him a rope, a soldier said to him "1 Lieutenant: "By my mother, Tenien t% aaaáneee and sebe". Then he looked out the window and saw the sergeant Eira M" on a parad, ageobado. Le NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC Pér te present is advised toi public that te Administration is v" obliged to tatorrumpir de nnev" ti eorvicio dti acoMoeto during te" Rora" te 8¥i to 10 by te morning and te Z to 4 by te tarta azi as during ta teche te 12 to 4 by. have marma^" otr" ve" ve" catititanbtesnanto at n-d "l tel Rio Pie "hte- Se saplic" te vagf. to the public constate with 1" ádmtwlrtraicjén proca rué" avoid tote deep ardite te ago*. J. GOMRZ WQ80 QéVtatanate te.fi^rvíte Vfihlfco, Po Iícíb j Pteteaa". T. A Advt.
I called, but he preferred to stay there । Then the first sergeant of the ■ Co. " B " leaned out of the window and MÍM 31 tatetento Sapia 4>" ** amarrweI Upon reaching the third floor the lieutenant, ?e ! said to the sergeant: * - You, While all this was going on, the door of the Company A. Office was almost open, and at the mercy of Padilla, who, if he had been chasing the Lieutenant or the Sergeant, could have entered without any obstacle. On reaching the third floor, Lieutenant Sapia asked for a rifle and ten bullets, and at grave risk of his life and voluntarily, crossed the courtyard of Ballajá and addressed Colonel Jarvis in the following manner: "Colonel, what do you want me to shoot?" to which the Colonel replied: "Kill him or take him, if you can! Crossing Ballaja's yard, Captain Parra and Major Field entered Company "A", followed by Lieutenant Oliver, officer of the day. Lieutenant 8a ' pia lay down in the Company "A" gallery, loaded his rifle there. Private Padilla saw them all; but no one saw him. A soldier came to Sapia and told him that from the flagpole he had seen Private Padilla. Sapia ran to the Morro Field and tried to shoot Padilla, but he did not see him. Padilla was committing suicide and all the soldiers ran to the scene. Lieutenant Sapia had only been in Co. "A" for two days and had not scolded any of the soldiers nor had he spoken to any of them, except for the Sergeants. Many comments have been made about this event, and there have also been published news items that are not at all accurate. This is from an official source, and it is the truth of all that has occurred, which we publish to inform all our readers and to remove bad impressions". By oitraor h eodowr pan ertarnr another Yesterday was declared Maxricie Romáa, by you Jury, guilty te uaa infraction to article 279 of the Code of criminal cujxictamieiito Román raoeviá ti corpse te Joaé AL varez García, of his grave, to tenar ti te Salvador Fornándes, The "acttag prosecutor", T ir "arlad" RomaM ooetavo ta acosaciéa,. The juca Roete "teló the next maxtea pan dictate cantearte. Si LICDO. V. RODRIGUEZ RIVERA He visited Saa Jaan this distinguid" ate "h judge nutecta*! of Os^ep. Rodrígate Rivan as aa" te nuaeteoe asá" inte" j tea vataa. y ate te te te" ste netos jua-1 ce" oob que ragata la Mágtaitatura tal. gata. The -latamnn with you affection to q "e| ♦.
The lack of paper is today a serious world problem.
The printing paper crisis has led to an increase of two cents in the price of all daily newspapers in Paris. The public has willingly accepted the increase in their favorite newspapers. The large circulations have not been reduced, since the public has become aware of the great difficulties which newspaper companies, not only in France but throughout the world, are now having to overcome in order to keep up with the situation and to be able to meet their commitments to their readers. As the shortage of printing paper is increasing, the daily newspapers are seriously threatened with having to suspend their editions in order to give more activity to the economy campaign which has been launched to alleviate the situation, since no means of alleviating it has been found so far. In the United States a further increase in the price of printing paper has been predicted. The struggle i against the paper crisis is hopeless there. Paper is one of the articles which has risen most outrageously as a consequence of the in dustrial chaos of the world, a direct result , i (Continued on 3rd. page.) I Appointment of i an aviation commissioner for P. R. The "Aero Club of America," in conjunction with the ' 'tete of America," has appointed a special committee to organize a flight around the world, conforming to the regulations of the "Aeronautical Federation IntemacionaL ' * The committee has been intagraHri by the following officers: chairman, Commodore Louis D. Bean mont; Executive Secretary, Major Charles J. Glidden, and Treasurer, Mr. Benjamin Hillman This Committee is visiting all the countries of the world, for the purpose of pointing out the points of the route, as well as to choose the bases of the provi alona mienta and ti terrain to at errizar. All civilized countries have been invited to take part in this tournament and it is expected that the number of contestants will be greater than previously known. Mr. George L. Dederick, has been appointed representative of the "Aero Club in Puerto Rico, and he may be approached by those who wish to participate in the projected flight. Mr. Dederick is also head of the Sea Plane Company, recently incorporated under the laws of Puerto Rico, to make the route between Puerto Rico, Cuba and Santo Domingo. DON JOSE DE LA TORRES MUSIZ This very cultured and esteemed gentleman, who occupies an important position in the municipal administration of Toa Alt", has been in San Juan. He came on duty, and, a few hours later, returned to his residence. Please reiterate our cordial greetings. BARCELONETA REGISTRATIONS (By Telegraph) Barceloneta, May 21. EL MUNDO, San Juan. Unionists, 165. Socialists, 33 Republicans, 0. Unionist Majority, 132. THE INCREASE IN GUAGUE FARES i Yesterday a public hearing was held before the secretary of the Public Service Commission, Mr. Barga, on the petition of the owners of the buses" running between San Juan and Martin Po fia, in which they requested that the owners of the buses" running between San Juan and Martin Po fia, in 1" which they requested that they be allowed to ride the buses at the current fares. Beprotenta a tos pMfciimarlos""i toI trade Guam Moteragán, and there sotaaon.
Cuba's harvest amounts to five million fonels I
(From Our Correspondent in Havana) s 1 The sugar harvest, the great sugar cane harvest, on which the economic prosperity of the great Antilles depends so much, seems to be culminating in the appropriate estimate made at the end of last year, 1 Neither the drought, nor the lack of arms, nor the worries produced by the pro- i letariat, have diminished the production which the specialists had expected. Up to May 2 i, according to official data in the possession of the Secretary of Agri culture, the nation's mills have produced the quantity of four million , two hundred and twenty-one thousand and forty-five tons of sugar. So far very few ir.gc| nio" have finished the harvest. It will probably not reach* ten, and it is almost certain that the majority of the mills will be grinding all of May and until June, and many will be in full production in July. i Cuba is one of the richest countries in the world; the golden river that flows through its fertile countryside, every day increases its flow. Fortune continues to protect it with her gifts, and how is Havana's "offices"? One is truly amazed at the considerable number of businesses. It is the prosperity that reigns in the country; it is the sugar at nineteen cents* it is the abundance of money that there is here; it is the thirteen hundred or fifteen hundred thousand Innes of pesos (if the price of sugar continues to rise) of this year. Fifteen thousand passengers have arrived in Havana in the month of April and that when the harvest is at its end; when it is, or was, time to leave and not to come. The Havana Customs Office is collecting from four to five thousand pesos a month. Cuba is in fashion, it is the country of the ero, that everyone wants to come to look for: Linares Rivas, Caruso, Blasco Ibáñez .... It doesn't even frighten anymore the heat, which was so much fled from As if it were autumn, the transatlantic liners win every day, full of people. There are days when more than eighty cargo and passenger steamers can be seen in the port of Havana. It is clear that many people also leave, but it is only a recreational trip. They are families who are going to travel. There are not enough ships, nor can the companies meet so many requests for passengers. The same happens with the houses, because there are none to rent. For a room they ask from $30 to S80 a month, depending on the place, and there is not a vacant place. All the old buildings have been dedicated to banks, offices, warehouses and garages. Huge new buildings have been built for "garages", and everything is little. There is nowhere to put a car, and more than twenty thousand cars are registered in the Havana City Hall. The commerce, taking advantage, sells as it wants and as much as it wants. The stores are crowded, eight theaters are full, and more than fifty movie theaters are working every day, and some of them since eleven o'clock in the morning. We are in the period of greatest flourishing in Cuba. There are, therefore, reasons to be satisfied, all of us in Cuba who work and have children, family, business and interests. Arturo MORALES. Havana, May 8, 1920. THE RDO. F Ormaarhea, will embark for Spain at the end of the month, in the transatlantic mail. The very learned priest, who is very dear to Guayama, will spend six months in the Peninsula. We wish him a very faithful trip. to two opponents: you ssñ<" Cantollops and another. Deepafa of having site exposed the case, for being an hour avamote^ fúé sneponiHda the sight until ti jaove" to ^Jas "nm.