ELmNDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4*00 One year, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
MORNING DAILY,
■áurea -- "eevnó eiaaa mmmt, tebriary >1. I U cha Paa* Offtea at Sha ?a*a. Posto Bteot (U i i U I I I; ^tato" of ámoriea) oaSar the Ato of ■arto Z, 18TV I
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 1920 |
| NUMBER 537
AAO II I SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO j
Ratified the trium| fo de ios unionisL tas eo San Joan
Throughout the day yesterday I con timed the general canvass of votes. The collation sheets of the electoral colleges of San Juan and Puerta de Tierra have already been reviewed, which show a majority of 139 votes in favor of the Unionist party. As can be seen, it is already confirmed the Unionist majority in the Se presentative District number 1, and consequently the nomination of our distinguished friend Mr. José de J. Tizol for Representative to the House for the District. The Board of Elections signe revi sing the lists of Santurce.  Yesterday, at 5:30 p.m., the canvass of San Juan was completed, giving a firm result of ratifying the triumph of the Union by a majority of 111 votes. Mr. Cu and Mr. Yager will find ai the carenóla of the Irnos On Monday at four o'clock in the afternoon will be held in front of the federal building the ceremony of the placement of the tombstone in memory of the American soldiers, belonging to the 6th Massachusetts Regiment, who succumbed on the island during the war between the United States and Spain. The ceremony will be attended by Bishop Col. more, who will give the invocation. The governor of Massachusetts, Mr. Channing Cox, Governor Mr. Yager, General Mr. Charles K. Darling, and others will give the invocation. Darling, and others, will address. In Military Band will attend.* the ceremony and play a few pieces. । A r-ipefiia of the National Guard, commanded by Puerto Rican officers, will take part in the ceremony, also Numerous members of the public are expected to attend the ceremony, for which 500 invitations have already been distributed. Tejamaniles Cypress | FIRST Ribbed Iron | GUAGE 24 Wood of all kinds. FINLAY WAYMOUTH AND LEE INC. Box 552. Marina, j TeL967y968. Elizabeth 2_da. 6 "OLDSMOBILE" AUTOMOBILES We piaos to advise that we have just received "OLDSMOBILE" automobiles ño tinco and seven seats. For those of you who are interested, please come and get yours before we run out.'' nBTRAHTÓNI & SOJO* (Oldsmobile Department) SAN JUAN. P. R. ¿ - - - "
n DE November 1920| number 537 9 *ieo. Bv "rd "r "f the Pr-iii-" A. * BvrioMO, PosteMtar ÜMiupl i of amortes) Nadar the Ato of marsh S, 18TO I _____ I
The new conflict between Japan and the United States.
* THE WORLD inserted a cablegram ge Washington reporting that Japan has protested oficiahnete to that Government under the new Calif ornian law oppressing children. The Japanese Ambassador asks that । that law not be applied to Japanese arrivals in California. In the "New York Ame T-ir-an" which we received yesterday, we read the following: "The negotiations which have been carried on between Japan and the United States over the law introduced in the California Legislature which prevents the Japanese from buying land in that State, have now been concluded in a manner unsatisfactory to the interests of Japan. The said law was passed by a huge majority in the California Legislature. TOKYO GIVES IN FOR THE FIRST TIME TO THE DEMANDS OF CALIFORNIA LEGISLATORS The law permits Japanese students as well as travelers and Government officials to visit the State of California, but it prohibits the entry of Japanese settlers and colonists. {The Tokyo Government, in spite of the protests of its press, which considers the measure offensive to the nation's honor, has recognized the right of California or any other state of the Union to reserve its lands and to adopt measures to restrict immigration. The United States Government, confident that its intervention would be the best stimulant, announced that it would protect the rights of the Japanese as if they were American citizens. (The State Department also announced that it would not oppose the passage of the "allien law,'' and that it considered the possibility that the law would not receive the Government's sanction too vague. The Tokyo newspapers continue to publish terrible articles against the American Government, and ask the American Government not to give up in the face of this situation, which is becoming more dangerous every day. HOMAGE TO MUNOZ RIVERA As a tribute to the distinguished patrio- 1 ta Don Luis Muñoz Rivera, whose forty-first anniversary of his death will be the 15th of the present, every good Puerto Rican should write to his friends, inside and outside Puerto Rico, during that day and the day before, on the beautiful postcards that with the portrait of the illustrious politician in a frame with the American and Puerto Rican flags, in colors, the name of the leader and the date of the mournful event, are on sale, until that date, in the main establishments of San Juan. One postcard -10 cents. -3 for 25 cents. Orders from the island may be addressed to Box 415, Telephone 1091. -San Juan, P. R. Advt. OLD BRONZE WAS PURCHASED: -Will inform Purchasing Dept. AM. RR. Co. of Poeto Rico. Advt.
r- -""T IMPORTANT NOTICE We are receiving a large shipment of: ! ¡! Twisted Rods of all sizes, ¡! - Galvanized Corrugated Iron and Li^o, which we will sell on the wharf at SPECIAL PRICES! (Inquire at the MERINO SAN JUAN'S FERRETERIA MERINO.
I - "LOWERING PRICES" ~
p Silk shirts^from $15 to $10.50 'j I Silk shirts from $10 to $ 7.00 I ' Fine shirts from $7.50 to $ 5.00 | Fine shirts from $5.00 to $ 4.00 Fine shirts from $4.00 to $ 3.00 Fine shirts from $3.00 to $ 2.50
Silk SHIRTS at special prices. i
Gentlemen's Effects Department I Fixed prices.
Pajamas - Underwear ; Socks - Braces - Ties. All at low prices! £.
GONZALEZ PAOIN Go., Inc. ¡? San Juan, P. R. c
Belts-Scarves Umbrellas- Canes Collars. < All at low prices!
Great* honors paid to the heart jleGambetta (CABIE FRANCES PARIS. -The ceremony of the translation of the heart of Gambetta has turned out extremely solemn Government officials attended en masse, as well as troops who paid military honors. The former Minister Etienne, in handing over to the members of the Government the heart of the distinguished citizen, pronounced a moving allocution. The heart of Gambetta was placed in an artistic receptacle and taken to the palace of Denfert-Rocherau, where the funeral chapel had been erected. Fifteen minutes later the body of the unknown soldier arrived there, which was carried by six soldiers. Guards of honor were set up and took turns every half hour.
The "Bolsheviks" ■ progress in the Northern Crimea FRENCH CABLE WASHINGTON. - On the occasion of the ; second anniversary of the signing of the ar 1 : mistice, Secretary Baker, Secretary Daniels and Generals Pershing < and March, addressed very eloquent men r ¡ sages to the personnel of the tie_ 1 1 1 rra and sea forces and to the veterans of the European war d, restored to civilian life. i 1 P SANTA MARGARITA. - Reports. '; clones from official sources say that j, healthy optimism reigns in the Yugoslav-Slavic cir- jculi, since the agreement between ¡ Italy and Yugoslavia is already considered finished ■ 1 ZURICH. -The latest official communiqué of the Bolsheviks says that the Red troops have passed the Crimean peninsula, where they occupy positions of great importance. THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF THE ARMISTIC BEL ARMISTICE IS CELEBRATED (BY FRENCH CABLE) PARIS, November 12. The newspapers devote special editions to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Republic and publish articles glorifying. The newspapers devote special editions to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Republic and publish articles glorifying the heroism of the French soldiers, whose sublime sacrifice ensured the victory of right and justice. -M. Leygues received yesterday the new Minister of Peru, Mr. Cornejo, and had a cordial interview with him. ROME - Giolitti has left for Margherita where the conferences between Italians and Yugoslavs are being held. PARIS. -The French Committee of the Olympic Games has sent a representative to the International Committee to request that the 1924 games be held in this town.
The Secretary of State, Mr. Colby, will go to Argentina (FRENCH CABLE) ■ i WASHINGTON -The Secretary of State, Mr. Colby, announced today that the itinerary of his next trip to South America includes Rio de Janeiro, Montevideo and Buenos Aires. Although Mr. Colby has not yet specified the date of the departure, it is known that the United States Chamber of Commerce in Buenos Aires has received a cablegram from the United States Chamber of Commerce, informing it that the trip will take place on the tenth and seventh of this month. The visit to Buenos Aires will be unofficial. RAPALLO- According to a message from Belgrade, the Delegation of j Serbia, through M. Trum_ bitch, Minister of Foreign Relations, has notified the Delegation of ' . Italy that Serbia is ready to continue negotiations on the bases already indicated by Italy. i IMPONENT ACT AT THE TRIUMPHAL ARCH OF THE CITY-LUZ [ (BY FRENCH CABLE) > - I PARIS, November 12. *! the to General Pan, victor of Alsa. ► i cía and to nien the Government has just im * ■ put the Victory Medal, co_ '; as a reward for his activity and his ex_ - i traordinary patriotism. ¡ PARIS. -The city appeared very ' beautifully festooned. All the public buildings, the most famous villas, the private residences and the Government buildings are beautifully decorated for the ceremony in honor of the unknown saint who will be buried in the Arc de Triomphe. To the, act, which will reves * tirá grandiose solemnity, will attend * the veterans of the war, the mutila- ► two, the deputies, the President of the ¡ Republic, the Diplomatic Horn and Al- * tos officials of the Government.
♦é v aé é é ó< o se e o e e e e e e e e ee ' Royal Dutch Mala k ■ i: ' ' ' The magnificent steamer of < ' p passage 'Trins Frederik I Hendrik" ? .o o will leave on Novem- o 17 <► . " < ' bre for ' ¡ ¡ " HAVRE and AMSTERDAM < admitting passengers and * <, cargo for any < ¡ ► port in Europe. Passengers should ; 3 communicate immediately- * * ► with the Agents < ;■ Sues, of L. ViHanil & Co. i ¡ ¡ > Tel. 580. 5 ■ Jua", P. R. ¡ t es ------
The Louisiana Slate Rice Milling Co. Inc. of New Orleans, La. Is pleased to inform its numerous clientele, of the opening of a Branch in San Juan, P. R., whose Offices are located in the upper floors of the Building of Messrs. Malgor, Gonzalez & Co." located at > Calle del Arsenal No. 8 Esq. Calle Nuev^, (Marina.) We can supply any kind of rice from our assorted stocks in the principal ports of the Island, at unbeatable prices. WE WILL SEE IMPORTERS EXCLUSIVELY.
Several predictions for one thousand five hundred years from now.
The machine to explore the time is already mounted in the cabinets of the men of science. The wise Stockholm professor Svante Arrhenius, a physicist for whom Nature holds no secrets, offers us in synthesis a picture of the world in 1,500 years. By that time, all the coal mines in the universe will have been exhausted. Its substitute in certain industries, petroleum, will have a more ephemeral existence. Within a hundred years we will have consumed the oil stored in the large wells of certain regions. There will remain, then, as substitutes, white coal, the force of the tides, the tamed winds exerting their effects through channeled channels, and, finally, the forests, the woods, which will cover immense spaces of the Earth, abandoned by its present dwellers to seek in other places more gracious, more pleasant, more fertile in natural products, the rational life which for centuries their ancestors have left behind, to make the effort and the expenditure of energy the ■. The men of those times were enslaved in labor, spurred on by the lust for wealth and childish prizes, after the manner of primitive savages. England has only enough coal for two hundred years. On the other hand, America can produce it for about fifteen hundred years. 5 In fifteen hundred years, the * inhabitants of the territories now * called Spain, France, Ale. : mania, Belgium, England, Austria, 1 Russia, I^olanda, Sweden, Norway.... ' will have disappeared. In their space will arise the great forests, which uti. Mankind will use in its various uses. And the ancient inhabitants of those countries, tired of struggling with the now barren earth and the deadly climate, will cover the surface of the warm and temperate ■ regions which were the cradle and will be the grave of mankind. 4 Along the seas and following the course of the great tropical rivers, will run the sumptuous cities, rivals of Siberia, in the midst of jar5 ---------- Old to the Forty 1 poisons that usually form in the intestiBoa kill more people annually than any other maL Weakness, exhaustion and senescence come from neglected and inactive intestines. Take Dr. Ross's PILLS eMonthly and learn why they are called "P1Lr DORES OF LIFE." Notice Ng. 20-1. Buttons are pleated and lined, s TA CARAZO, Brau St 72. i Advt. ; BILLIERS 3 We offer BREADS and all kinds of accessa rivers for same at i- unbeatable prices. ■ P. L. Cormier Cómp. Cristo 16| - - Apartado 634 SAN JUAN -♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦a*
Important Proclamation of the Governor of Pto. Rico
' ' WHEREAS, in the Proclamation of the Governor of Puerto Rico of May 28, 1916, published in Administrative Bulletin No. 143, all the mangrove forests of the coast of the island of Puerto Rico and adjacent islets, belonging to the People of Puerto Rico, described therein, were declared insular forests. WHEREAS, the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, after holding a public hearing as provided by law, has recommended to me the modification of the aforementioned proclamation, excluding from the declaration of island forests made therein the mangroves described below, located in the municipalities of San Juan, Río Piedras and Bayamón, on the grounds that a large part of the former are to be filled in, when the Port of San Juan is dredged, and the remaining mangroves are to be used for urban or commercial purposes once they are cleaned up. "NOW, THEREFORE, I, ARTHUR YAGER, Governor of Puerto Rico, in (Continued on page 6a.) In a gift to the gentlemen of Massachusetts In the magnificent "Condado" hotel were presented by the veterans of the 6th Massachusetts Regiment, resident on the island, the distinguished American gentlemen who, in union with Governor Cox and General Dar. ling, are at present visiting us. The ceremony was attended, in addition to the hosts and the honorees, by well-known elements of this city. Mr. Cox, Mr. Darling, Judge del Toro Cuebas and Messrs. Huyke and Besosa spoke. All had enthusiastic phrases of praise and welcome for the visi. so many, who correspoñdiei^n in turn cpatestoadó them dfseursde with great demonstrations of sympathy. dines splendid, in which flowers and fruits will be tasty gift of smell and palate. And the countries of the mists and of the cold will constitute places of pilgrimage for the explorers who look for among the ruins of the old towns the remains of extinct generations and of an empty and ostentatious civilization. THE "PAIGE" MODEL GLENBROOK 6-42 is only $2,200. See us and we will show you that it is the best car for its price in the market. UNION COMMERCIAL CORP. San Juan, P. R. AUTOMOBILES "PIERCE-ARROW" Of all those we received we have only one left in stock, seven seats, which we are pleased to advise those who are interested. PIETRANTONI A SOJO (Pierce-Arrow Department) SAN JUAN, P. R.
! To Exporters | 4 ► ■ - I - -A. . ■ a a a m ó ó ó A A * * * r n n n n n rl rt Anm mi ir
* * * The Portuguese schooner AREOSA , anchored in port, ad- $ ¡ > mite cargo, for Barcelona, Valencia or Alicante; solamen- Z ¡ ► ► te, for one, of the ports of the aforementioned cities. X < ► For reports: £ O J. M. LOMBA t < ► Consul of Portugal. x woeooeeeeoeoooo.eoeoeeeoeeeoeooooeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeooo ;; Porto Rico Gas Company and ¡ * ly >we notify our subscribers that the gas service will be ¡ ¡ ¡ * Completely suspended from noon on Saturday, November 13 ', until Fas 6 A. M. Monday, November 15. ¡ : í Receivers for Porto Rico Gas Company. ; ; ; R. M. REDDING. HERBERT W. BROWN. '