THE WORLD
8 pages 3 ctvs, Ssmsstrs, 84.00 Unaflo. $7 JO
I Offdnast Salvador Brau. RT | Tal. 833 P. Q. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ANNUAL 11
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
I Published and distributed under permit (No. SOI) autkoriaad Entered as second class matter, fe'briiarr 21. 191". I Art of oetober 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office of Saa Josa, Pel^R;' at the Pest Office at San Juan, Porto Hico, (United I Rieo. By order of the President, A. 8. Burleson. Postmaster Óenes^^ States of America) under the Aet of march 9. Ib79 |
| SATURDAY, MAY 8, 1920.
| NUMBER 218.
Pto. Rico cheers ek-generalissimo Pershing Barcelona cheers í ex-generalissimo Joffre.
Energetic attitude ! French Mlbno. against the strike: (Per Oabto Francés) ' PASIS. May 7.-In a meeting held by the metalworkers, the official political circles are confident that the Government has decided not to accept the proposals of the strikers, if they do not decide to resume work. The strike situation is not improving. The slates of Angers have joined the general strike. j REGAL VISIT TO LONDON : < BRUSSELS, May 7.-The newspaper * 'In Etóile Beige** announces that the < Boyes of Belgium will leave on Saturday ( for London, to visit the English monarchs. . j 1 DEATH OF AN ARTIST ! , TARIS, May 7.-Hortense Schneider, operetta artist, creator of nnmerMIMdsas works by Offdnbach, ' Halevy and Milhac, has died. ( She was <2 years old. -. i , Ceocurso de má- i Hiñas de sumar ' 41 Btírf6ughs" Xa house of'*'Fínlay WayAouth and . i Lew", dfjtan,Juan, has directed the following: Apt to all Banks of ¡ ( Puertú-JUce. May 5, 1920. 1 1 Basen- Comercial de Puerto Rico, । 1 Humacao, Puerto Rico. Dear Sirs: J i In order to create a spirit of friendly and at the same time to recognize the ability of the operators of the mMtUnas to tune BURROUGHS, we are organizing a "Contest" to be held at 8 p. m. at our Regional Fair facility on the following basis: 1. Only Bank employees will be admitted. 1 2. The order in which they will operate the machine will be drawn by lot. All will add up in the same ma- ■ ( quina checks that will supply- ¡, ■os. i j A We will award a prize of 825 ! ¡ to the Vendor p a Diploma. 1 5. The Jury will consist of Mr. Emi ■ lio M. Vasallo, Mr. A. G. Bishop and Mr. Alborto B. Lee. 6; The test will be of time and the time necessary to check the sama will be counted. 7. An electric BUBEOUGHS machine style 226 will be used. 8. The Jury will decide any points raised during the con- I cyno. Hoping that among their employees ! ! there is a tuna fisherman who wish to enter ' 1 this contest, we ask you to send us 1 sps é-broB before Friday at ' five P- m. ) 1 From opted Attoa and SS. 88., signed) POM?. WAjH^tUTH & LEE. INC. ! ' _ ampíenos wishing to enter 'in ■ ' ei '"'■fajRift-' must be in our ^Ut*|KMn opr the Bogíbnal Fair for 4*ftlr>8MtaMCÍones necessary to Os 4^4 B. "U on SATURDAY. KM£ú£tatae q|"rt a tímente the nom hte fojpraea" that wins the "Contest* £*4^ esuM^.^ "Record" complotO;4^t8k ^MOOpq inverted, etc. etc,; and feM)M $ W Messrs. Finlay Way representative, give the '*N|nEB0UCH|B* ' in Puerto Rico, doadr.vmSN y" tent SI offices and home" SÚ cooraxcie using the "BUZWOBP" * ' - Advt.
Yesterday's funeral was a manifestation of mourning Yesterday, at 6 p.m., the funeral of the wealthy businessman Don José D. Riera, who, as reported yesterday by EL MUNDO, succumbed in a tragic way in an accident near Arecibo, took place. Since four o'clock in the afternoon, a large number of people began to gather in the Plaza de Colon. All the social classes of San Juan were represented there: commerce, banking, politics, etc. At 5 o'clock, the hearse arrived from Santurce. Many c o r o n a.s of natural flowers adorned it, everywhere.... A great number of automobiles followed the first one. After a short stop in front of the Theater, the sad procession continued along Fortaleza Street.... Carrying the ribbons were Coll Cuchi, Walker, José J. Benítez, Manuel Martínez, Arturo Bravo and a representative of the Arecibo Casino. Behind followed, among others, the following gentlemen: Valdés Cobián, Fernández Juncos, Donato Riera (brother of the deceased), Ribera Chevremont, Georg® tt y> Suárez, Zalduondo, Cadierno, Eduardo Ferrer, E. Cautiño, from Guayama; Jesús Benitez, Celestino Iriarte, A. de la Haba, Pedro Arzuaga, del Valle, the director of our colleague "La Democracia" and many others. After the religious ceremony in the Cathedral, the funeral procession went to the Cemetery. In the customary place, Mr. Bareeló made use of the word.... He emphasized before the concurrence that listened to him with deep respect, the exemplary life of industriousness that the deceased always observed... Then Mr. Coll Cuchi spoke on behalf of the Chamber. He said that it was the first time that the Chamber had recorded in its book of minutes its sorrow for the loss of a citizen who did not have the same citizenship... Mr. Coll's prayer was moving. A great p a lidity covered his face.... Many of those present held their handkerchiefs to their eyes.... EL MUNDO reiterates its deepest condolences to the family of the deceased. The inscriptions eo Humacao (By telegraph) EL MUNDO San Juan. Result of inscriptions is as follows: May 6, Unionists, 87 - Socialists 56; Republicans, 16; May 7, Unionists, 135; Socialists, 125; Republicans, 11. They make forces the Reds for having some majority, but present their people after four o'clock, when it is impossible to be able to enroll them, because of the short time available. Correspondent. Don Manuel 6ouález Last night at eight o'clock we asked the * - Auxilio Mutuo" about the condition of Don Manuel González and were told that he suffered a fracture in the left forearm, several bruises on his body that requires bed rest, physical and mental rest. No visitors are allowed while the natural discomfort lasts. Ooattinnamente received a multitude of telegrams from people of the island, intereatodoee for the health of the prestigious gentleman. FOR SALE: Own land for sugar cane, tobacco, pasture, etc., from ten ropes and upwards. Summer farms. BSPECIAL: 700 cuerdas do vegas y sobre vegas near TmJlllo Alto, part planted in cane. AMT * DUNHAM BSA1> ESTATE Telephone SMM, Apt 9 . "a B Jauto No. 2 ADo"
i _ From the first beasts of noon yesterday, an immense crowd was _ _ ; crowded on the esplanades of the mue- ; lies of San Juan, for the purpose of I awaiting the arrival of General Pershing, which was announced for three o'clock. s । All the buildings were adorned ■ two with flags and banners. Nomeí rous crowds occupied the rooftops, bal- . ■ cones and parapets of the buildings tu i 'i la Mariha. ^>the ships in the bay s! presented a beautiful appearance, profusely decorated. SCHOOLS ARE CLOSED g i Todcs the children of the schools of ! San Juan were excused from the cia _ ¡ ses, in order that they might take part t j in the reception. There we saw nifios , i belonging to all the schools. Lie - । vaban books under their arms and their I countenances indicated great joy. . i j L>. ARRIVAL s At two o'clock the "Northern Pacific" entered the bay. j The sirens of all the ships greeted you enthusiastically to the exalted sun-.
She was <2 years old
dñdo, -qulM^ -daade the csbiwrta, against tata aoncMnbe. The buqwb docked at mmelle No. 5. A Hiiúnrüd. concourse, composed of the* House and House Committees, of distinguished dame* and officiiee of* the police and army, as well dine also r^resentantee of the Gebienae, awaited the G:ner>i at the wharf, '1 ■ - ' ' '
Grandiose and ait enthusiastic reception for General Pershing 6 A huge crowd crowds the pier to - welcome him.-Great military parade at the Morro.-The great American caudi- " i lio delivers a preve and eloquent speech at the Fair.-He receives ui¿ "bouquet" of flowers. - N
T7f - । On docking the went up * welcome him b km*señores Rcssy/ Pe - nedo, Valdés, IMtoe, Siaca Pacheco, b i Hernández Lópm&Feliú. Valdés, Cobián, Huyke, Ce^hp^Cuchi. Guerra, Toro Cuevas, BenatfMto, Rodriguez and mu - chas other distiiMddas personalities. THE COMMITTEE-y' - t With General Per h ng comes Rep. A. S. B. Stephens, of Ohio, a former President of Puerto Rico and one of the most determined advocates of the extension of the Agricultural Appropriations bill to the island. General Brewster also came. General Brewster: general inspector of the American forces in France and who accompanied General Persh^Kcduring the war. General BrMKer.was a colonel in the Regiment of PImK> Rico and wears on his breast the French War Cross and the Distinguished Service Medal awarded by Congress. General Brewster is also the recipient of the Legion of Honor. TO MR. yORDGVVJMb^VILA ■ j Figure on the mu F úi&u 0
r , bieron al transport, as soon as it docked. THE DISEMBARKATION The first to disembark was General Pershing. Behind him were the members of his staff and other members of the party. The immense public that swirled on the wharf gave a delirious ovation to the ex-generalissimo of the American troops who was presented by the Regimental Choir to the most prominent persons who were present. General Pershing and the Governor, Mr. Benedict, occupied Colonel Jarvis' car. The car walked slowly, as the crowd, eager to see the General, formed a compact nucleus and filled the route through which it had to pass. For all those who greeted him. Mr. Pershing had an affable and affectionate phrase. All along the way, he never ceased to receive sympathetic tributes and admiring applause. We saw the General chatting amicably with a group of young ladies, who went to greet him. A ■^UTpHssJ eí U^ngrudo* 1 n^Rar qu* ¡ was very happy to be among his brothers the Puerto Ricans. And i
- 1 H ■ B H B H B H
i j Oomisieraedo Resident of Puerto JU- m ' co in TTliñíi L'~~ láedo. Félix Dérdo- : < . va DávU*,'' who is accompanied by his Mía i i i y "HettejiériMi. wife. Futría MarUnes- 1 , M*nr Córdova DfivRa waved a '] r i handkerchief' dÑfrom the deck, for /ccn- . ■ -1 test 'fie eee modo " tos imrañBMos t ¡saludos'que le dirigía* mu amigos. Lo" , i Iprtnwraáqgp salndarie;^** a Jer> Re- > 1 ]dactmn^iív THE MU^SpO- qnieae* su-.
then, addressing 1" lady of the | coronal Shantou, he added: -How glad I am that you lend . you m contest * the Boja Cross!' THE PEOPLE FILLED THE STREETS As General Pershing passed the Fortress, the cheers and cheers were again eine and toe firase toe reptirsc (Continued on page 3).
Visit of gratitude to a great benefactor of Pto. Rico On Thursday afternoon, a group of children, currently being treated at the Sanatorio Insular para Tuberculosos, near Rio Piedras, visited the distinguished gentleman Don Pedro Arzuaga, who has been at the "Auxi lio Mutuo" for a few days. The little patients were welcomed by Miss -Superintendent of the Sanatorium and presented Don Pedro with a beautiful bou- ' qnet. formed with flowers grown by them, there in their retirement, in moments of leisure. The card, which they joined 91 present, read: "The patients of the Sanatorium salute their benefactor, rejoicing in his improvement and praying to heaven to grant him health for many years to come". What an eloquent and at the same time simple proof of gratitude! Mr. Arzuaga, deeply moved, thanked the little ones in very affectionate phrases for such an affectionate visit, and promised them that soon, as soon as he was completely recovered, he would go to see them at the hospital and spend some time with them. Everyone is aware of the generous help that Mr. Arzuaga has given to Dr. Raíz Soler, who is very much engaged in the work of the Sanatorio Insu- - ■ lar para Tuberculosos. The patients ■ who are fighting against the cruel ailment, also know you; p^^that ^*Mn-á |*n tatio his illness and in a dwarf ' : they heard of his improvement, they apre , ! sured to congratulate him. Before returning to Rio Piedras, the eníermitos spent a joyful time, n - sitando la Gran Feria Regional. AGAIN IN SAN JUAN After having spent a short time in Guayama, Don Jo' sé M Aponte, an active and intelligent sci ■ ruja no less than 1 ' the "Monte Flores" Clinic, has returned to 1 ' the enrollments m Maaati (By telegraph) Manatí, May 7. EL MUNDO. San Juan. i Enrolled today. 343. republicans. 223. unionists, 115. socialists, 5.... ' Republican majority over Unionists, : 108, Republican majority over Socialists, ; : lists. Republican majority over ! Unionists to-day. 604, Majority re- 1 : publicana sotare socialists, 1013. V. Ramos Casellas. í 6nn situacidn m Catiro i - ' i THE REGISTRATIONS IN CATAÑO ; (By telegraph) ' Bayamón, May 7 ' ' | EL MUNDO, San Juan. 1 The inscriptions verificad^ in Ca- ' ' i taño today gave the following result: Republicans. 144; Socialists, 176; ■ ■ ■ Unionists, 43. ' 1 As of today registrations have given re- 1 ! jumped as follows: Sorialist majority over Republicans, 1, j Water shortage especially in Ca- ¡ j taño takes alarming proportions. ■ People there would thank Senator Valí dés to arrange that through Linm. I railroad of his property to take water ! from the Bayamón River, to distribute it free, to numerous families who need it, since the Assembly has not done anything to improve such a painful situation, partial pigments circulated an anonymous sheet that public opinion qualifies as a sign of political weakness of its authors, i The correspondent j - í i i SAN JUAN RACING AND SPORTING = j CLUB ... | । He announces that with the resignation of Mr. Biara, member director of j ■ said corporation,* the races that were to take place on Saturday, the 8th of this month at the Hippodrome de la Paria, will be postponed, and these will be held for tomorrow. s "San J">a Rartng and parting C3*h. hDVT J
The Catalans give a jubilant ovation to General Joífre ) (By Cabla Francés) k BARCELONA, May 7-Al Ucfor to this population the Marshal of Frau- ' cia. Mr. Joffre. was the object of an indescribable ova ' ción that tribut.iivu him more than fifty thousand people > 1 Marshal Joffre has precidido boy 1 a banquet r that offered the Catalan journalists to their colleagues of Fruí cía . The Manseal said goodbye, emotionally, to the authorities, and decided to return to France today. A HUNGERIST DETAINED FOR CONSPIRATORS PARIS, May 7.-Mr. Mentagnc. secretary of the Seamen's Union, was reduced to prison at Le Havre, by the police. Professor Lonot. member d-* the "Socialist Federation of! Seine," has likewise been reduced to prison, for having been discovered to have figured in a plot hatched against the security of the Republic. (Continued on 3rd. page^) i _ I Plazuela Sugar Ce. I 4v^^ XH! ^4t S VeroaoBM, to premiere at J § tenaroar the prescvte zafra, '! £ EIGHT CENTRIFUGES HEP- i k WORTH Je 30" expensive mix- ; $ ubr Je 700 p. c. capacity and J* " Máquroa SUadard 13" z 18* ; ! a of the Hwutt" Scarwaed arod ; " Change, estarodo ero perfect : & estada and fuadaroarodo ero J our Central Plazuela, Bar- J celaroeta, where they can be seen 1 C and will inform sabre the same. ;5 Direct your alert to nalicitud de & : í¡ datas to the oficáaa of this " ' & Campaiia es Saro Jroaa, P. R- " Taroca Na. 2, Apt. Na. 748 " " Sai diu, P. R. Maní 29 1320 | Plazuela Sugar Ce. | HOTEL CENTRAL I SOON SE INAUGURARA | Sauz Jo "ñ No. 12 : | San Juauz. Pto. Rico i j * Cane Tinting CONFERENCE OF VALLE ZENG On Saturday, May 15 at 6:39 p.m., the Agronomist Engineer, Mr. del Valle Zeno, will give an illustrated lecture at the San Juan Municipal Theater, in which he will reveal the secret of his discovery against the epjdmia of sugar cane tinting. Admission to said act will be free and persons interested in attending the same may request tickets from Mr. C. Asenje, Apartado 415, telephone 1091, Luna 44, San Juan. Advt. | CAFE YAUCONO 1 I Vero our exhibition in | I ei building I of the i GRAN F£RM REGWNAl I I í I I I "EL CATALAN" j I We have just received toe famed | I FRUIT BOMBONS T IB- I | LADTT.TAS, from the cusa L Jacqum | I and Co-, of Paria. I If you come to the FAIR don't let I I I I buy rtra | *■ ■ ■ ni" f