THE MONDO
tO pages 3 took Uhfe. <7.80
Oficlnatf Salvador Brau. 8T I | Tfel. 833 P. 0. Box 345 ■
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR I
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Pnblishad asé diatribnlééé **4m permit (No. SOI) Bathorñéd bj^má^g Enteród - ■ teeon* elms matter, i eb r u ■ r y 2 1, 19 19 19, I Act of October 6. 1917. eq Ale al the Poet OfSce of Saa Juan, Port* W at tbe Poet OfSee at San Juan, Porto Bieo, (Unite* Rim Bv order of tho ProaiJant. A. S. Burlooon. Pootmaatar UqWo fe State of America) under the Act of march 3. 1879 |
I SATURDAY, APRIL 24, ¡920.
' NUMBER 266.
Today the sentence of Mr. Caillaux will be known Italy and England seem to side with Germany.
In mva central azKanira will be installed at Capas , Ua SintticBto coDorpuesto of several cfeMWs and caaaereiantes of ("pua, ' has just, acquired at 5S75.OOO all the : ■qaqpñnaña belonging to Ja an i "tero Central Córatúra.... "fe Rincon" f caa d purpose of instMlMr a new : r> axnrarera factory in the juri^- f ^feo Win of Cajeas. The Sindfento cuen } tan,. ■díini -, coi "m copitol of $300-000 { eam which will be incorporated into the le- * , of Puerto Rico the annex to socio- | , dad । mnillllllll II IN bspajta for J-A I CÜESnOW OF THE CHANGE XI naU. a" animii prtactpia a in- I qpAatar i anitii "1ili im "1i a los Mojo- ; teas *■ nrgiria in T■"■"■"■, in ruó". * *■ ane the Wep**Hr ■ rt" nm" DO want t y" reñirse artfecales in Spain, in vir } taí Rea peco valar ene has the franco l "a "1 utaM" part Vn number Me toan- j *MBO* rr^accaes and Spaniards are finished i fe* ■-all, falls" such a reason, to dissent ! the |M "íbüidJ "é ña tenar ana conference i *■ Madrid, to study the situation ' <■1 ron, tote i-national and dictate modi j das peas "seras. ' . Olea t bureeaui i" de isaal indole se , Sqppn the ñttsasasas news public, das - pse la pransa de Mueva Tort, no >bstasta the inqaiotadas observed in tSULlBB bsenbns de neaqpioe de Kspana. s* da pee- suRns fie las literal innei dirtebe.rotee toyjapuwOartyd* lea taafi sint-* s wla p*r* t-Vis psridw IplK (i Mini pnm BilWillKtUlfMMHilKlbi rtá mu *mm * Ct P Ve MlfekliMniri tetar Hite fe faú. Los jefa fe h jfeú tai tetad" (M tos teN*n mi ntaibm le ana important Mfilii ite -rtwil More than one hundred thousand Man*'* 11H1 ban sM" occupied lA* MUrtes isrrorpieidfru a cuatro ese pénate te l*"ifc- te TI-fina. te la Itiku* te States y te ■mtnul lo* ▼enteterte te billetes cayeron te Mk teta te la lay te la lay par haber trátate te veater une te "m "*11r "8 * " funciona- - rio te la potete. Id" acantea te m<Miited assure q. teten te cfbeteoría more tetenciaDas an algnas cñdadas**. mainly in Cte*"|a "d and Télate. Li epitome of the 'Balízate" of the calaje sugar 8n eemfteta and rapid disappearance roe the teaenteimiento Valla Sena. B aate aerie problrn qw has boy telante nneatm ininctria sugar re. sneBd dafenitivaaaantet and in all ana Cbuni-"-te .fcl causadle morbid and wrf- ^"^ur te the "afermeoad. Ateótate teauime te lea same tefe-teca*. Shreo p"" anntq.tr mente te la enCrowded man la catempteHBa variety te mw ;"-, **s "te seeeptibl*, ceaae "erSataBaa""bianea", "raynte" eic- *" le apGcadN.M procedure a""tete* dteite peeque le eeenesaizate BR teretes and mriftvos al tetantar* la .Tm^^ V*"teína.** mte panted mte >- R** -* remain. te tteB* te 1-ferie 1* ¡ameno* di. teterie do ya iwrifa this na píente aun* y rite "termo. atembes te* qnáman obtain - r setenaste tnaecntental asen to dñ^itea yor eemite a p "f "teriteeata; - *ri efe tea, eaBe of the ^^0,^11 Utes. "M, Ban Jfe*^ ""fe® 1 ■JÑtefefete tepfete - -.
The>Germans insist e^supporting : 200,000Jmen (nor Cable Frances) ROME April 23.-The German government bs dingwlo a" note requesting that the uiilxtar clauses of the pax treaty be revised and insisting that it is of all iwpresrinrli ble for it to sustain an army of 200.000 bombees, for without it it would not J- -Ii i. defend itself against the c monists, the general reduction d. the n i" in ntoí envisaged by the "So ciedad de las Niciones is sufficient. '' SI President of the San Remo Conferences had submitted the above-mentioned proposal to the representatives of the Allied nations. In Landes circles it is absolutely certain that the discussion of the note will prolong the duration of the conferences. INGLATEKRA AND TTAMIA SUPPORT EOS ATAMANS. PARTS, April 23. T" note addressed by Germany in request that the strength of her army be increased to 200,000 Men has produced astonishment at the Conferences. The English and the Italians are very favorable, and it is believed that they will not only support Germany's request, but will also allow her to send representations to the French Conferences until the San Remo sessions. In what "pe are contestes the CantiUerias of Estopa is in the fact <m 108 Motes, with such Motivo, are >roloBgaiiii almost indefinídaaente, and qm mú hsWn aiy broken, yus 11 Iridia fnm paint It cm a Id the" Hite i" italitanle atitéta to which jw are jroponen jnttntar the comsionados dolos government do Rom and London. CATT.TJIXJX WILL BE SENTENCED TODAY. PARIS, April 23.-The Senate of the High Court has decided to apply, by 150 votes to 91, Article 78 to Mr. Caillaux, in whom there are mitigating circumstances. The sentence to be applied to the former head of the IYancaean government will therefore range from one to four years' imprisonment. The Senate declared itself in recess, to study the penalty to be imposed, which will be applied in this afternoon's session, SANATORIO DE LA SOCIEDAD ESPAÑOLA Tickets. Juan J. Inza, Conc-.peion C. de Dottni, José B. Lomba. Eduar do Z. Rivera, José V. Alonso, Rodolfo O. Torres and Ignacio Ferrer. Departures: Francisco R. de la Granja" Gerardo P. Al varea, Rev. Alfredo Maria and Manuel F. Villamil.
The problem of public instruction in the city and state of New York, as may be inferred from the infnmarinnes published in the press of the great city, has reached a point which endangers the public welfare, and therefore it must be faced with courage and without hesitation to seek a solution which will put the interest of the people above all else. . In P- K- we have the same problem- ' ma Teachers complain that their services are not paid equitably. Na - da fairer qtte their complaints. They prepare the soil and water the seed for the ' harvests of the future and the enterprises of culture, the state of civilization and the beautiful realities of the progress of the peoples have their origin, indisputably, in their fertile ¡ teachings. It is admirable to admire his noble altruism, his perseverance and his abne- ' ! gation, when one thinks that his work obtains such a petty reward that it is not enough to live as a man. The only way to live as men should live is to have a jus'c concept of what they do not represent before society and the world. Pan improve their pitifulU* situation. teachers abandon schools, if they close the 'nrachos tesi|ila fe la eumm, the lita til-! MI tito póse, J M DI D"-mento-because it is only fair that all should aspire i improve, since the government cares so little for their lot-in that the* schools will all have to be closed. se penalty of the hand being cast upon : incosepe: ents to put into their hands a work for which they are not qualified. The result, as may be presumed, will be disastrous. The solution to the problem does not seem so difficult to us. It is enough for the legislators to make use of the greatest possible amount of common sense and to open the eyes of the spirit to look into the mists of the future to see what will happen if the catastrophe is consummated. It is necessary to deaaostiate. so deDE LUIS 3. Y^KRAXTDEZ OCXHJSTA. Just returned from Europe and the United States from a trip d* study* d* diseases of the ' eye to leading clinics d* Barcelona, Paris, and New York. Associated with Dr. Matanzo vi- ; will be in his office, Alien 29, from '9a2a.m.y2a5p. m. j í Advt. I
■ I I I ■■■■.- I " . . . ! To the Ingoncros and SupemíaMieates of Factories. We are pleased to notify you that hereafter, your orders for Babbitt metal will be promptly filled by PORTO RICO IRON WORKS, INC. our representative* on this island, at prices out of competition This firm has IN STOCK, a complete assortment of the famous SYRACUSE BABBITTS 'a , . brand products as follows: ' Babbitt Metal "Manganese", ' n n n "American Marine" " " " "Interurban Motor Metal", "Master Metal" | Phosphor Bronze, ' White Brome, Solders, etc. * The rtffidfe tosfefliero. Dm Amí "m Ferré, Admirtrato and Vice Prrñdctite of dfclui firm, <uiai is Mea fMrifiariiado > cm the most of this metals, todrá macho chaste ea saañtotrar iatormes to SayeriafradMtrr and Eac "xados of factories, ta* 1 Reres, eto, acercare the sum more vMtajasa to roast them. We are iniprimieato nn very interesting and instructive booklet about the k maneto of ether reads jdhrblm Send your nuiuW and direeten and reatititireC m "n a cfe|Ha- SjafeiW ? writing Weeks, maoklyn, Tt T.
Defendingi the Teachers I Eén Puerto Rico the Teachers*) enjoy the salaries earned by their American colleagues residing in the Metropolis .
i? b 6 Bai 1^^ W 15-year-old José Colanbrella, who has just dropped out of public school No. 1 to go to work. With no experience, he is earning more than his former teachers. New York teachers are quitting at the rate of 100 a month. i ! I
It is not necessary to make great efforts of imagination to understand that the people who take care of their educational problem in due time and in due form, make a good business by increasing the appropriations destined to procure for us the benefits of knowledge and culture. B1 degree of the culture of the peoples can be measured by their scholaxcs statistics.T) from the colleges and universities come out the great inventors, the ecMMNnistaa, the professionals of all orders, the great politicians who manage the destinies of nations. The peoples who cannot or will not attend to their instruction, will pernunororin awkwardly at the back and will not be able to contribute to the work of improving the human race by putting an end to ignorance, which is our worst enemy. The laaesfios must be paid as they deserve. Property owners should not haggle over taxes, for if the people were not educated so that they could and would know how to fulfill the duties of the perfect citizen, their property would not have any value. I The Legislature of the State of New I York has introduced a teOFteo, through Representative Donohue, calling for an increase in the salaries of saaosters as follows: An increase of forty per cent on salaries below $2,260;. an increase of thirty per cent on salaries above $2,260 to five thousand dollars, and an increase of twenty per cent on salaries above five thousand dollars. , .. In Fuerte Rico the teachers* do not enjoy the salaries earned by their American colleagues residing in the metropolitan area. . Their situation, in tanseruencia, is sais pressing, and their dewnndas are more "te plenament* Justified*. Esa*.demanda* ne are guided by a MffaHd of inteÉés meceefeuafio. But the weaning'of the* professedly *" debelle- . car up to *1 arrumo de rotate*"* *1 ham Ir* and * deprivations*. Ate sumenuno Parttcq*ae*M *' our "dótela that per tevuutate permateajtaL cenado n^wfei eteahtaterijrjto te aortM y mi tirada a. 27 y to te - axis Mü<tojÓBto3' * L SUCJL DR A M|tofi~ h eo. VL j/y ; -
tufe sns swlfes, their litars do not pa- ¡ jan, much more so when one considers that any increase would not suffice to level their incomes with the high cost of ¡ , living. i They ask less than anyone else in com- . paracioii with what their work means to society, and the people must : demand of those who represent them in i i ■ power, since it is they who have fie reco- - f ger all the benefits, that I 1 justice be done to teachers and that they be put j > i in a position to work with more ' :^mpefio for the cause of culture and ! ¡' civilization, since they are sal- 1 -1 vaguardia of the future. j - í Rafael H. MONAGAS. । . > - 1 1 1. - 5 i j| HOTEL CENTRAL ! I SOON TO OPEN | 1 Saín Jo*é No. 12 I¡ > X s . £ San Juan, Pto. Rico j I VENDORS i ¡ We need ex-! perts to work, both k in this city and in Is ' la, as salesmen of n ues { after reputable works. Di- ¡ ríMuy. to San Jose 10, where ¡ . we have our offices, i Tin; GROLIEB SOCIETY ! ■ . Advt. >
> 1 ■ - ■ ? Moon 48 1 P. O. Box 842 1 í
Ale- A man died mania is asked to attend yesterday in San Juan conferences suddenly.
(By Cabio French) i PARIS, April 23.-A representative i of the newspaper "Le Matin** at the San Remo coni' ferences ba been able to ente ' rse of a plan conceived by the je| fes of the governments of Ingla'^errr. and i Italy. XJoyd George and Uitti, for the purpose of having Germany invited to take part in the sessions held there. This news has caused a deep sensation in Europe and great indignation in French circles. The representative of Le Matin** adds that it is a question of inviting the Chancellor of Germany, in person, because he considers his presence there indispensable to solve all the economic and political issues concerning Germany. The representative of ''Le Matin'' adds, finally, that the head of the French government, Br. Millerand, has shown Eloyd George and Nitti that they are on the wrong track. THERE IS A FEAR THAT THE CONFERENCE OF SAINT-ROMO WILL BE DELIVERED. PARIS, April 23. Mr. Gourbell, will pass from Governor of Guadeloupe to Martinique. He will be replaced, according to spontaneous request, by Dupart, governor of the island of Réunion. Maxt cb^ad, ador dá . P i en*e Etm^^Wnor wa - bon. PARIS, 23.- The lecturers at San Remo have heard the military experts, concerning the future régúnea of the Dardanelles. which will figure in the ; Treaty. Moments later, they proceeded to discuss the question of whether the Staitstii id "state" is to be verified by means of a biscite. Until after a few years Turkey will be obliged to respect all religious beliefs in its territory. The ''League of Nations '' will elect a representative in Constantinople to enforce the above decision. i The Council will examine this evening and tomorrow the answer to be given to the Berlin government to allow it to support an army of 200,000 men, the withdrawal of troops from the Ruhr and the disbandment of the local militia. Millerand, Berthelot and Belfour attended a luncheon given to them by Lloyd George. | The question of the "Bolshevik" advance on Batum was discussed. The delegates of France ; and England opposed the evacuation of the city, demanded by other I representatives. Before the municipal judge, Lic. Wiliam J. Santos, young Esteban Quiñones and Celia Guadalupe were married. There was no session yesterday at the Municipal Court, and there will be no session today because it is a registration day.
[printing!
In the Valdés dock died a>' cr " presumably of a heart ailment, a man native of San .Sebastián, who had come to San Ju.nn with . the purpose of improving his critical economic situation. According to statements made to us by the policeman Ensebio Corchado, stationed at the pier, this man's name is Quiles, and he arrived the day before yesterday from Cíales. ( Quiles spent all day yesterday sitting on one of the mtiralloncs located at the foot of the office of the ' ' ' West Railway Tunnel' ', and since the morning he began to complain of some pains in the heart and strong fatigue that bothered him continuously. The fatigue subsided, and in the afternoon, about three o'clock, he drank a cup of coffee. A moment later the fatigue and heart pains returned. The policeman Corchado, seeing that the ailment was becoming more serious, called for an ambulance. The municipality replied that the ambulance could not go because it was in Santurce. Poor Quiles died a few moments later, that is, around midnight. Yesterday at six o'clock in the afternoon, the corpse of that wretch was still lying, covered with flies, on the esplanade of the Valdés pier. A newspaper cnbri" his face already deformed, and filthy rags defended his body do El bill de la pesca LAS GESTIONES DE < ORpnv.X DAVILA EN EL CONGRESO Nuestro (jóionat'o RtoiiHe, Sr. Oinlova Dárila, intóplile "icin [If B Sí its |B í!Hí lli conditions of the country, has submitted for consideration by the U.S. Congress a bill (bill number 13.5YES"> for authorizing and directing in\es: i";itions and experiments with <'l lio improve the pe>< a < in Puerto l.ico industry. The bill passed to the Committee on Insular Affairs. LOLITA CAMONA Soon to embark for the North will be the beautiful senorita Lolita Carmona, stenographer in the office of the Commissioner of Public Service." Lolita is on a two-month leave of absence. IMPORTANT As the production ¿DONDE ESTAN MIS HIJOS? raises an issue of great social importance, it would be advisable that only older people go to see it. It is a splendidly directed, highly moving story. Next Saturday 24th at the RIALTO CINEMA. Universal. Advt. I Plazuela Sugar Co. f NOTICE | We sell, for delivery at the end of the present harvest, and EIGHT 30" HEP- íi WORTH CENTRIFUGES with 700 p. c. capacity and " Standard 13" x 18" 3 Houston Scanrood and " Change, being in perfect ¡5 condition and working in Central Plazuela, Barcehaeta, where you can see ¡¡;I eátomarán sfebre the anonas. Address your bid or request for dates to the office of this > Compsiís in San Juan, P. R. " Tanca No. 2, Apt* No. 748 $ Su Jiu, P. R. fian" 29 1920 Ptautia Sugar Co. |
PhrhinG V WORKS y
Telephone 548 | San Juan, P. R. i
- I This is the brand that indicates high quality in I PAPER PRINTING I í Invoices Bond Paper ! [Letterheads Letterheads Newsprint GIL; DE.LAMADRID HNOS.