EL MONDO
- Offices: Salvador Brau. 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 A year, $.7.50
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR II |
| SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
- "lairiouMO BAUar permit (Be. BOlj MiMniM by "db । " áet of October -. 1"17 oe aunt at the Post Office of Hoe Juan, Posta i If -f the PraaMea < A. *. Barioeon. Poatmwtar Gmioral
i Enterad e s aeeend elans setter, f e b r u * r y Si, at tha Feet Office at Esa Jeaa, Porto Rieo, (United Btetea of Amarica) andar tba Act of and >, iwvfi
| SATURDAY, OCTOBER 9, 1920.
NUMBER 508.
Peace has tired I grap enthusiasm i throughout Poland!
(By GaHe French) VAKSOVIA, October 8.-It is reported that on arriving last Friday the delegates of PoLnii and the "Soviet" ¡ to the city of Riga. were received i by the population with visible displays of enthusiasm. The <>newspapers of , that capital express with satisfaction ■ li news of the armistice and predict | that Poland, which has been greatly hindered since its independence, will soon live a life of national sosie^i. ALL CANNONS HAVE CEASED TO THUNDER. WARSAW, October -The fighting which had been going on between the Bolsheviks" and Poles, according to an official report received from the H "*"La front, has virtually ceased, as far as the Lithuanian sector is concerned, the official report adds that it will continue in accordance with the proposals put forward by the delegation of the League of Nations. Hostilities have also ceased in the occupied region between the borders of Pru- j sia and the Poturio eludid. BROOKLYN TRIUMPHS OVER . THE CLEVELAND i i i EBBETS FIELD, October 8.- The ; " Pitcher" of the "Brooklyn" poisoned I with his curves the batters of the ! "Cleveland." The game was sumame n- i i te contested, in spite of the efficiency of the ■ * 'Pitcher" of the "Brooklyn", for this t club beat the "Cleveimd" with a "gCUre" of two runs to one | THE HUNGRY MAYOR RE | ■ s " SISTf AUNJP * " ■ - - - - - - ~ i LONDON, October 8-Mr. Mac Swiaey. warden of Cork, has entered the 55th day of his abstinence- The last no che has passed it very well, but it does not appear that he has had much rest nor does his weakness cease to inten sificane, know" the news published by the '"Irish League Bulletin". For the rest, the state of his health has not changed. He embarked for the United States nuaalro sprouted friend Don Eugenio Bardales, soda and director of the Com palia Industrial Algodonera j Cea ti Mr. Bardales goes his gentle wife and daughter and his two sisters-in-law, the sings wins of the highest prestige in Buastrus social circles. The ladies of Bardales will be au aautaa of the country a season and vi sitaran the most important cities dti Osutinante. Mr. Bardales Ue goes ti prepósito also of realizing eompsaa for ti pegfecñmamiento and better rearcba of "a industry, remaining in his place our dear friend ti retinado young don Fio Martines, the gen of rendas sympathies in núes was saciedad. Desoumoa to the sSTes. of Bardales a happy trip and pleasant stay in the Ñor Búa coaaervar the stomach the Mgado and intestines ■aladahles úsense the Piídona of Life of Dr. Ross. Notice ^-TX.
IA the Traders in Atianrena Shoes Atianrena tas consescíantes in sapotea qpe ya sofreno recibiandn luliroore de espatos de lona eme mdn de goma (KBD8), de ■aretzas fineses marcas "CHAM no, nans sue fump, LESA FUMP. LOTOS FUMP" and Agaettac pn wish to taz cuevear make him ereuguida, park the demand "g gf ii and nnsetroi des yncharwnee to loe first we Retratare! & Sojo H lilililí do Catando) - ÚR !■■■■> >. *- .
Mr. Siaca and the case of the socialist petitions.
i We spoke yesterday with Mr. Siaca Pai checo, secretary of the Executive. What is your attitude, -we told him- I before the present campaign that in. con tra yours have started Republicans and Socialists, on the occasion of the petitions affair? s -What I had to sayX apropos !of that question, I have already made it known to the public, by means of my letters published in *']ja Democracy''. I have too much work in this office, as you see, to occupy myself with anything other than the strict fulfillment of the duties imposed upon me by my official position. What do you think of the attacks that have been made upon you? -I think that, as on other occasions, as they have done with some other heads of Departan.-anto, I am now the propitiatory victim at whose expense certain ends are to be achieved When this period of political exaltation passes - continues Mr. 'Siaca - then I will not have any inconvenience in expressing my ideas publicly. The present state of mind sees things differently. I The law is one for all, and in enforcing it in the matter of the petitions, I did not look, nor should I look: neither did I look at what political party the petitioners belonged to, or what political party my decision might favor. i -Was the reconsideration of these petitions made? Yes, sir. After receiving opinions from the Attorney General'', I have reconsidered the socialist candidacies, giving the benefit of the doubt to the candidates in all those cases in which the law could have more than one interpretation. As a consequence of this resolution, the names of the candidates for representatives to the House for the representative districts No. 6 (Vega Baja, Vega Alta and Dorado); No. 17 (Cabo Rojo, Hormigüero and Hormigüero); No. 17 (Cabo Rojo, Hormigüero and Dorado) and No. 17 (Cabo Rojo, Hormigüero) will also be certified to the "Insular Board of Elections'', in due time. 17 (Cabo Rojo, Hormigueros and Lajas); No. 18 (San Germán and Sabana Grande); No. 25 (Coamo and Barros); No. 27 (Cayey and Cidra); No. 28 (Caguas and Aguas Buenas); and No. 33, (Naguabo, Ceiba and Las Piedras), as well as the candidates for members of the Municipal Assemblies of San Germán and Comerio. Regarding the other annulled petitions. -adds Mr. Siaca-, -sustain-.
HUDSON SUPER-SIX We have ready for immediate delivery some cars of the well known Hudson Super - Six brand. If you wish any of them, please place your order without delay, because due to the great demand that these cars have, the number that the factory ships us never satisfies the demand. Santiago A. Panzardi, Inc. San Juan. Ponce. Cuayama. Arecibo. Mayagüez.
TODAY
Mgmg SUCCESSES Mgmg SUCCESSES "LA-MUJER PROHIBIDA" CLARA KIMBALL. YOUNG
Lowering Prices on Fine Gentlemen's Clothing.
Cashmere Suit $25.- 30', -$17.50 " " " 40.- 20'; - 32.00 " " " 50.-25';;- 37.50 " " " 55-25';- 41.25 " " " 65.-30<;- 45.50 " " " 75.-3O',- 52.50 " " " 80.-30';- 56.00 ' Raw Silk Suit $40- 20' ( -$32.00 Waterproofs' Layers of .$12.50- 20%- $1000 Layers of $15.00- 20'5 -$12.00 Layers of . $25-00- 20'7 -$20.00 Layers of $45.00- 20'<-$36.00 Gonzalez Padih Co, Inc. SAN JUAN, P. R.
The pact agreed upon in Arecibo, Aguadilla and Humacao Origir.il comínlirio of a conRjlado sodalisla We have reliable reports that the Socialists have made a pact with the Re publicans in the districts of Arecibu Aguadilla and Humacao. A distinguished member of the Socialist party, upon learning of this, commented thus, with an energetic gesture: -The Socialist leaders may do with the party as they see fit; but my vote and the right I have to think there will be no one who can coerce them, or make me vote for another party different from ours and say the opposite of what I think in conscience, and not even that I should keep silent about what I should say. Our esteemed friend Don Antonio R. Barcelo, president of the Unionist party, told us yesterday that he will comment next Tuesday on the question of the Socialist Convention and the pact with the Bepublicans. Mr. Barceló is now extremely reserved and promised us very important political declarations, which he will make in EL MUNDO on the 12th of the present day.
The Socialist party will receive the gold coins Santiago Ig'esias says so. And he adds that the Socialists are willing to sell themselves for money On the occasion of the information published yesterday by our esteemed colleague "La Democracia'', asking if the Socialist party should be fought with gold coins or with healthy redeeming principles, Santiago Iglesias made the following statements to our Editor, who went to question him. 1 i -San Juan is the pretty girl of 1 the capitalist parties. According to the opinion of the newspaper "La De- ' mocracia''. a river of gold will be able to buy this precious jewel. In such a case, the Unionists of "The Democracy'' infer that it may be that the gold given to the sociidis- as. could be easily obtained. And in these circumstances," he added, "having plenty of gold and being the strong capitalists of the country, what do they do? What are they waiting for? The socialiss tas of San Juan are willing to res cibir all the gold that the Unionist party will give them And in the end, of course, see ■ they will see the results The girl with that gold and in spite of that gold, would be socialist. -There has been talk that the socialis- "' tas should be in jails. If these insidies and others that have been propagated cannot be proved, let the authors of these calumnies be the ones to replace us in the dungeons.
Gen. Me Intyre embarked on Thursday for Port-au-Prince The "Reina Regente" will arrive in December Our distinguished friend Don Pe dio Rodriguez was kind enough to tell us that Gen. Intirc, former head of the " Bureau" of Insular Affairs, embarked on Thursday for Port-au-Prince (capital of Haiti), on the transport "Gorgas". The General intends to inspect >the customs of this port, and there he will await the transport "Hancock," which will take him to Santo Domingo, where he will also inspect the customs of the Republic. From Washington the Governor has been informed that the General will arrive in San Juan on the transport "Santa Leonor" at the end of the present month THE REINA REGENTE WILL ARRIVE IN DECEMBER Mr. Rodriguez also informed us that a cablegram has been received from Washington communicating that the Spanish cruiser "Reina Regente" will arrive in San Juan with a detachment of cadets in the last days of next December. The Government of the United States requests that the Hispanic ship be given the same honors as the "Alfonso XIII".
Last Minute THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OF THE SOCIALIST PARTY AGREED UNANIMOUSLY NOT TO MAKE A 'PACT WITH THE REPUBLICANS. -THE AUTONOMY OF THE PARTY IN THE MUNICIPALITIES WILL DECIDE ON THE PARTIAL AGREEMENTS ' The Executive Council of the Socialist Party met at the office of the '"Free Federation'' in order to deal with matters related to the ' agreements and mandates of the last Con- : vention of that collectivity. i In the act the final resolution was read out, granting ample authorization to the Council to use all the legal and political branches it considers appropriate to defend itself against the attacks to which the socialist grouping is being subjected by the Unionist party. The following methods were indicated to defend itself against these attacks. 1.-General agreement with the Republican party. It was unanimously rejected. With respect to the partial pacts, it was declared that only the autonomy of the party in all the Municipalities would decide what was deemed convenient. The Council agreed to discard its influence in this matter. It was agreed to invite the 13 "American Federation of Labor" in the country to cooperate with the Socialist Party.
The Executive Secretariat registers the rejected candidacies.
When autwity sells out, ride vigorously the "RIDERS OF JUSTICE" - 9 Magnificent parade of courtship and well FOR SOON OFFER THE MEDAL.
In the "Free Federation'' a communication was received from the Executive Secretary, informing that the candidacies of all the socialist representatives had been registered and certified. These candidacies were those that were presented before the amendments to the Electoral Law came into force and that by virtue of the retroactive interpretation were without effect. In addition, the candidacy for the municipality of Comerio, which had also been invalidated, by virtue of the investigations made by the prosecutor Díaz Collazo, has been recognized. In a decision of the Attorney General's office, it is stated that the Executive Secretary does not have the authority to invalidate the signatures by the procedure implemented by the Prosecutor, therefore the investigations cannot be taken into consideration. It is the opposing candidates, if they believe it appropriate, who may challenge them, subject to the consequences derived from the validity or not of the procedure* This has resolved the cases contained in six "Mandamus'' that had been filed before the Supreme Court. Those referring to the registration of three municipal assembly candidacies are still pending resolution. San Germán has also been recognized at the last minute. Three municipalities are under discussion, which in the opinion of the Socialists have been illegally declared null and void. These are Hormigueros, Vega Baja and Toa Alta. PRESIDENT WILSON WILL LEAVE HIS PALACE In Wasldngton political circles it has been publicly known that President Wilson will leave the White House if Senator Harding is elected in the next elections. This attitude of the President is due, according to the "New York Americar'' newspaper, to the fact that he does not want to give the honor to Senator Harding of receiving from the President's hands the power of the North American Republic, after this Senator has so strongly attacked the views of Mr. Wilson and the "League of Nations.
I u I I Don José Herrera y Gorbea H H FAÍLECIQ YESTERDAY AT 3 P. M. H His parents, brothers, uncles, aunts, uncles, cousins and other relatives part - II ^re cipate this painful news to his friends and invite to the funeral that will depart from the mortuary house, Tetuán 38, last floor, ■■ at 5 o'clock in the afternoon for the cemetery of San Juan anticipating BB thanks to those who concur, for the pious actSan Juan, P. R. October 9, 1920- Hl ^1 No obituaries are distributed. H|
French steamer "Caravelle" .expected in this port about the 14th of the present, and will admit cargo and passage bound for HAVRE and BORDEAUX, (FRANCE.) For further information address BEHN BROTHERS, INC. Agents.
TODAY
American population has increased by 14 million.
(By French Cable) WASHINGTON, Oct. £. -The total population of the United States has increased 13-710,842 inhabitants '> or 14 per cent from the previous figure. This estimate does not include the 12,250,000 inhabitants living in the po.-fsions of the United States. such as Alaska. NO SUCH RESIGNATION HAS BEEN MEXICO CITY, Oct. sT - In pia nsa of this capital has published reports that Fernando Calá derón, high commissioner of the' nejican republic in the United States has tendered his resignation. However, yesterday evening, in the offices of the presidential palace and the Ministry of State, news was received denying such rumors. MORE HONORS GRANTED TO THE KING OF BELGIUM. RIO DE JANEIRO, October 8 After a brief session, the Brazilian Senate approved the bill conferring on King Albert of Belgium the title of citizen of Brazil, and authorizing the erection of a monument commemorating the visit of the King of Belgium to the aforesaid Republic. Amins measures will also be approved by the House of Representatives. REPRESENTATIVES ELECTED TO THE INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE. HAVANA, October 8.-The Secretariat of State, by virtue of a recent decree, has appointed the representatives of Cuba to the Congress of the "League of Nations". ANOTHER STRIKE BREAKS OUT ON THE ISLAND OF CUBA. HAVANA, 'october 8.-A railroad strike has been declared in the Camagüey part of the island. So far, the strike does not affect the traffic of the central line trains. Pharmacy Clerk 2 practice clerks are needed in the dispensing of prescriptions and one in the dispensing of patents. Apply in writing to "J" EL MUNDO. Advt. BACO TAKING EFFECT ON HIS ADMIRERS Elias Cruz, Carlos Santiago and Jose Sjler were brought before the Court, charged with having promoted a loud scandal, while apparently in a state of intoxication They were sentenced to pay $10 and costs, eachPlated and lined buttons. A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. ▲flvt. ICINE LUNA g TODAY SATURDAY TODAY $ The thrilling drama x "Wayfarers" by ' 5 HERBERT RAWLINSON g and the second episode of 5 ALIVE OR DEAD g ^^OGRAM_SELECH "M^ X M AÑ A wT-^DOMINGO^S For second and final viewing x THE TRIANERS 9 ea the aatitie and aecha, cm aáBerei Me- fl reates ea each laatita ' S Matinee .... 20c. and 10c. Z Evening 35c. and 20c.* 3 Coupled, Dances, Romanzas S
PAPER SACKS we sell them printed and blank^
Iw
STANDARD PBINTXNG WORKS Box 842, Luna 48, Tti. 548 San Juan, P. B.
Stationery "" generaL