ELAWNDO
8 page* 3 ctvs. Semester, XjOO A year, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau. 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO ¡
Fuatteita "ná "intribntad "n<er pmmtt (Ha. á "l) tutaM bj at oetobar A M1T. na 11* at tha Part OMa* ti Saa Jóna. Porto Olea. Wv rt A* Pr-"a-t. a. a. A Uvrieam. Pvrtaaaafr O*aara!_
1 rt *" Poa" Ot*e" at **" /"aa. Part* Bita (Unit** i nn4*r tk* Art of march *, 187"
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 1920.
| NUMBER 531.
ARO U
Mr. Harding proclaims that the League is dead Anarchists throw bombs in Logroño.
The great Unionist demonstration tomorrow.
Xa* r-*iiini-i organizers -of tomorrow's event caavten briBantemen te zas raapoctive" steps. Yesterday and antooy* tasaos seen the commissioners do* da propaganda, led by núes te" dial nido tag nido friend Don José Ruiz tai* ata have a moment of npaan so that all the threads remains * united in ai point of the grandioMdad, and they go it conaignando fulfilled aneada^ passes resolte undeniable that the pa*gna* aañalata for the great popular maní faetecita "a brillantísimo. Warnings from Mr. Ruis Soler. Bl aador Ruiz Soler has recomendé do to the* Unionistas of San Juan and to lo* that come from the Island, that it is man tanga "1 order and consideration for the* adven atino, and that it is not thrown to the wind ana single rxriamarió mortifican to. The organization and order of the demonstration The demonstration will begin to orga alzar* at two o'clock in the afternoon in the terrena* of the antigno cimpamonta of "Xa* Casas", using also the te rxeams dot last "training camp" and the cari otara de la* Monjas. In the pnen te of Martin Peda an are* txtaafal will be erected, bearing in the center the OgManto ¡aacriprion: "Entrance to Puerto Arturo". At the indicated time and first sound of the bugles of the Uni in, pp will move the manifestation station towards San Juan and will enter by the Cavafanga walk, turning around behind the Theater, to take the street of the FUrtataua towards the Palace of the Government. It will go up the Callo and the calata i" San Fra*iwo. stopping tatito Port Arthur. From a tribune, Mr. Bferceló will witness the parade Bata" the delirium of enthusiasm and the overflow of cheers.
The overflow of cheers, Mr. Antonio Barceló, the triumphant senator, will take the tribune and from there, he will make a speech. The organizing committee of the event has decided that only Mr. Barceló and Mr. Iriarte, presidents of the Local Board and the Central Board, respectively, will address the public, which will surround, ardent with enthusiasm, the tribune, which will stand out in the center of the Baldorioty square. From Mayaguez will leave tomorrow at six o'clock a special tten f Mr. Raíz Soler has made all the necessary arrangements so that - a special train will leave tomorrow at six o'clock from the city of Mayaguez, which Ue gata to San Juan at 12 o'clock. The ■ Railroad Company will make a fifty percent reduction, which will be in effect until Monday night, with the purpose that all the inhabitants of the towns along the railroad line have the opportunity to witness the political festival. i A recommendation to the hotels and restaurants The Organizing Committee recommends that the hotels and restaurants of the city prepare accommodations for the thousands of strangers who will come from the island to take part in the man: ■ testation. What Mr. Ruiz Soler says í Our friend Mr. Ruiz Soler told us ay* that tomorrow's act will be unprecedented in the political history of the country. It will show that the Unionist motto spontaneously drags its followers. Mr. Ruiz Soler added that thousands of people will attend and that he is sure that it will be a great success.
Alarm last night in San Juan
Last night at nine o'clock, the inhabitants of San Juan and especially the residents near the Municipal Theater, were surprised by a very intense smoke coming out of the back of the aforementioned coliseum. Captain Schettñn was immediately notified and went to the site of the incident, where several firemen and policemen were already present. The alleged fire turned out to be a can of live phosphorus that had been placed, we do not know for what purpose, between the Municipal Theater and the building of the Furto Rico Gas Co. i It resulted with some burns EX "FIXADEXFIA" Ay* arrived in Voneznela the steamer Fi- i lataMa*, the "Bag. D. Lina" j Se Buy BBOMCB VIBJO:-Infeamarán Da jeftimmta ta rm*r" AM. BB. Co. of Furto Bic*. Advt.j ' I- I" . 1
in the right foot the individual Euge- i nio Castro, who was taken to the emergency room. The Prosecutor Diaz Collazo was one of the first to go to the site of the event, proceeding to the investigation of the case. The popular fantasy, prodigal in its novelistic positions, already saw the black hand of some criminal, involved in this matter of the live phosphorus lathe There were various rumors about the place where the incident occurred. At ' Puerta de Tierra it was said to be at the "Nitrate Agencies". The police arrived at the place where the incident was said to have occurred and were convinced of the mistake, later learning that it was in San Juan. ' Pm All-All Nights The LIFE PILDORAS OF DR. ROSS have been mndoen teles dehnqwr:.de fate. i Km for over wtañteo years. The demands t papalv of cRe aeMcdiOb coMtandeBciile c* ' increases is pamba evident from his attentive. j notice No. ZS-K.
L "STINGAREE" i THE AUSTRALIAN KNIGHTLY BANDIT AUSTRALIAN _ J i i i TODAY - E* d theater "Three Flags" - TODAY ; * I Don't miss his famous haronas Three episodes < and an adventure of the anta < ;; ^Reporter Police" by Metralla will be shown.
I HIGH QUALITY - LOW PRICE I
IPalm Beach I in I All Sizes | All Styles | All Colors" FOR GENTLEMEN! YOUNG MEN i
Unfortunate car accident in Bayamón
Last night at about seven o'clock, an unfortunate automobile accident occurred on the highway that leads from San Juan to Bayam¿>n. The wealthy farmer José Moran, of Spanish nationality, was on his way to his farm in his Huds'jn-Super Six, No. 3-328, carrying his children and a midwife from San Juan to assist his wife, who was about to give birth. "In a pronounced curve of the referred highway, it seems that due to the speed of the car, it swerved in the direction of the ditch, making it impossible for Mr. Moran, who was personally guiding the car, to stop it. When it was not possible to stop the vehicle, it turned over twice, leaving the passengers under the car, from where they were taken out by some neighbors who were near the place of the catastrophe. In the report, they were taken to the Hospital of this city, where they were given the necessary aid, but the life of the victim, Fe'.a I Oquendo, who died on arrival at the hospital, could not be saved. The skull of the unhappy Oquendo was completely smashed, Mr. Moran received great blows in the chest and face, and two children of the said "iballero were seriously wounded. The news spread very quickly, and a large crowd of people went to the Hospital to inquire about the condition of the wounded. This Correspondent, together with some friends, went to the place where the accident occurred, and was able to see Mr. Moran's luxurious car completely destroyed. Fortunately he could distinguish the path off the road, where the car swerved. Very felt in the city the unfortunate accident happened to Mr. Moran, that brought by consequence the loss of the esteemed and very well-known Fela Oquendo. At the site of the event we were able to see that numerous agricultural workers were requesting news regarding the state of the wounded, of all those who travel from Bayamón to San Juan, informing us one of them that all the workers of this place idolized Mr. Moran for the fact that he had been a member of the family of Mr. Oquendo, and that he had been a member of the family of Mr. Moran. Moran for the fact that he was the only settler who during the last agricultural strike willingly offered to increase the wages of all his workers. We are informed that the wounded are still in a relative state of improvement, which we are very glad to hear. THE CORRESPONDENT. It plisa and forran botone*. JA CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt.
¡1190 1100
Mexico obtains a great triumph throughout Europe.
(ENGLISH CABLE) PARIS, November 5.-The extraordinary envoy of the Government of Mexico, Mr. Palaviccini, has finished his diplomatic mission in the three European Latin mtions, with success in his negotiations^ passing through England consign® that the English Government will resume its relations, in December next, with the aforementioned Republic. Spain promised to help the aforementioned country by investing enormous amounts of money to increase Mexico's exports to Europe and South America. The Government of Italy has also promised a direct steamship line to the ports -WE INVITE our supporters to see the new model - -COLE AERO-EIGHT--TIFO CALIFORNIA- , which we have just received from BORINQUEN TRADING CORPORATION i EDIFICIO BELAVAL ' Tanca No. 2 - TeL 1104 ¡ Garage Stop 17, Santnrce SAN JUAN, F. R. THE PROGRESS OF COSTA RICA* SAN JOSE DE COSTA RICA,! November 5.-The Congress of the Public Re-. decided (Gnvotar to an extraordinary session, which will be held on the 10th of the present, in order to submit for the approval of that Legislative Body special bills, in order to achieve with the greatest possible haste the reconstruction of the country. THE STRIKE HAS ENDS' IN THE GREAT GRETASS LONDON, Nov. 5- -The Government has officially announced that it has succeeded in containing the strike and that all work in the mines will be resumed next Monday. The authorities are also confident that the railway service will be restored to normal immediately. ' > PROHIBITIONISM SUFFERS . A MmROTA. LONDON, November 5.-The people of Scotland have succeeded in defeating, by a considerable majority of votes, the "referendum?* held there for the purpose of imposing prohibition- J .
Gonzalez I Padin I Co., Inc. I San Juan ■ Ponce - Mayaguez ■
Trolley accident occurred at Pta. de Tierra.
Last night, at stop 4 of Puerta de Tierra, c-L "irro electric trolley number 26 ran over the 8 year old boy J :sé Mar cos Contreras, completely fracturing one leg and causing strong con tusions in the other. HOW IT HAPPENED. According to the police officer Juan C. Velez who made the report, the boy was riding on one side of the cart and when he fell he was caught by the wheels. HE WAS CAUGHT BETWEEN THE WHEELS. Fortunately, this happened at a time when the cart was coming to a regulatory stop, otherwise the boy's body would have been completely dismembered. The boy's wailing was heard by the driver and the driver, who got out of the wagon and tried to extract the boy, who was crying in pain, imprisoned between the wheels. All their efforts and those of the public, who began to gather at the scene, were in vain. The wheels would not let go of their prey. Enhances tried another procedure, which proved to be better. THE WAGON WAS TOLLEDAbout 300 people gathered at the scene of the event, who, seeing that there was no other means available to free the boy, resolved to overturn the wagon. With a single shout more than 400 arms began to push the cart by one of its sides until they succeeded in overturning it. The trolley, in obedience to the power of all those muscles, fell off the track and landed, strangely, in the middle of the road. TO HOSPITAL The injured child was picked up immediately and taken to the hospital, where, as we are informed, he is in the hospital. Salvador Martinez and German Molinaji, motorist and driver of the car, respectively, were taken to police headquarters and released without bail by the Prosecutor, who ordered them to appear today at the police station. At the police headquarters, we also saw! Ledo Amado Rivera, iboga do of the Company, who went there to investigate the case. BOXING IN THE COLLECTIVA / ♦ According to reports, yesterday held a brawl in the "Collective", Monserra te Vísbab Juan Santana and Pedro Már quez, having the first dispamdo a revolver shot into the airé to intimidate the others. The weapon was seized by the active captain of 1"' Police Mr. Schettini, who made the investigation in union with the Prosecutor. The latter ordered that the offenders be denounced for disturbing the peace.
Another serious loss occasioned by the war
1, terribly i f i sad publicity material. The human being, from his heart J i to the tips of his fingers, does not know how- _ eo put humanity on display. i ' ' * As his admirer and friend-says , Tumulty -I have loved him best because he e did not love him. ' ' He finds something "dita e: rabie in the character too grandiose "for the dramatic scenes and attitudes of the ordinary political game." a One day when a reporter wanted to hear s 1 of the President something to give as r J delight to the public, Tumulty says WUa son exclaimed, "You must understand that I am not made for these things. I don't want to be exhibited before the public. If I tried to do it, I would do it very maL e I want the people to love me, but e i will never love me ' ' ' "The President-adds Tumulty-was in nineteen hundred and seventeen a vigorous, active, alert man; and even I when he was sixty years old he looked about 1 forty-five. Three years later, during a parade of the veterans of - the great war on the terrace of the White Hunt, there was ' ' a man sitting in a chair: the President, shattered, but l ' still with alert mount. His fits. ® white messes, his men broth, his fl3 | gura bent. He is sixty-three years old, " I but he looks older. He is Woodrow 3 i Wilson. ' ' ' I I I i In the parade passed an ambulance with ° ¡ wounded, crippled and blind soldiers. As they passed, they saluted slowly, reverently. The president raised waving his hands to salute them. "When I saw him-i says Tumulty- I found tears in his 1 i eyes. The wounded man was waving to the wounded. - They in the ambulance, *1 in the chair,' 1 í were the same: losses of the great gue- - rra. ' ' -I Tumulty concludes, "I do not believe that - ¡ President Wilson deplores his wounded, for he understands that no : man can die for a better cause. 1 . But I am sometimes surprised, even *, when it might seem strange to him, *; that a man who has been grievously wounded in the service of his country can i, deserve scorn and calumny from his countrymen."
Mr. P. Tumulty, Secretary to the President, has just delivered at Mary land, at a Democratic meeting, a magnificent "speech,'' (which he had the courtesy to send to THE WORLD, with a thoughtful dedication, as we said yesterday), about the intimate personality of Woodrow Wilson, whom he has served as Secretary for two decades. The private secretary, Tumulty, presents President Wilson as a "man misunderstood by some and vehemently misunderstood by others, as none has been in the political history of the United States." Before his boss retires to private life after eight years of incessant work, Mr. Tumulty quie re to make public some traits and phrases that paint the President in his en tera personality Among other things picked up at random in the ten years he lived in his intimldad as his private secretary, he refers that the day he returned from Congress after having read his message asking for the declaration of war, and when he still heard the echo of applause in his ears< the President sat pale in his cabinet, remained silent for a while and at last said: "Think what e^them were applauding: death to our young compatriots. How strange it seems to me to applaud that!'' This, says Tumulty, gives an idea of how Wilson hates war with all his soul. "When Germany's challenge to the United States by war came, this same Woodrow Wilson, who was the most ardent supporter of peace, was the most ardent advocate of forceful measures to bring the war to an end." To this effect, the words of his speech in 1917, in the Atlantic Fleet, are quoted: "I am willing to sacrifice half the navy; Britain and we united can destroy the U-boat menace." Regarding his praise on the front page of the newspapers, he once said, "It is
The Red Cross in Puerto Rico
The Committees which have charge of the campaign for members of the American Red Cross in this Capital, are actively working. i N'j notwithstanding the fact of finding all hearts agitated by politics, with an incomparable devotion, ladies of different and perennial ideas who have received contrary impressions during these historic days, have continued united in their work for the Red Cross to endure among us. On Thursday evening, the 4th of this year, the Land Gate Committee, formed by Miss Belber and Mrs. Loubriel and Mrs. Luga Viña, held a meeting at the Brumbaugh School, which was attended by many ladies and gentlemen.
and agreements were made to ensure the success of the camp. A few days earlier another meeting had been held at the Cine Real. The neighborhood was divided into eighteen districts and each district was assigned to certain persons. These, who were present, accepted, and will begin their perennial work at the appointed time. Another meeting will probably be held at the Cine Real, whose owner is a generous co-operator of the Red Cross. The campaign will begin with a parade which is being organized with great enthusiasm. THE "PONCE" The steamer "Ponce" which left yesterday for New York carried 65 passengers and general cargo.
NOTICE We are again in a position to accept orders for PORTLAND CEMENT brand "ATLAS" at unbeatable price. EZQUIAGA'S NEPHEWS . San Juan, P. R.
^^1 HOUDINI "The Island of Terror" TODAY " Nn M um MVÍP. ñero n. tana amazing production in 6 acts. CURRENT PRICES.