O C
10 pages 3 ctvs. 3 ctvs. OdHHvifR^ red® Ua "kim
OtfvwdiF ...OraHa OS TaL m P. & Bm MI --ó-■
MMd* ? - ; vi * -- --
MORNING DAILY.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
AM I
SAN JUAN. RICH POST
Robruary >1,1"". am ai omébm "L tolT, en dteot too toertotoeof dtodtom Pea* Orto" -- -"" toan, take Stop, fUaited.
SATURDAY 14 M APOSTO CE 1*2".
| NUMBER MI. ;
Eight shotsGreece dictator The "Bolshevikis" want to strike with Germany and Austria.
The solidarity of the allies will never be broken.
* (FOB FRENCH CABLE) MOTON, August 13.-At a reception given to Mr. MiUerand at the Town Hall, he declared that the Republic is not concerned with the question of national reconstitution. The Allies are united and will remain united, despite the inevitable divergences due to the national character. The union which exists between us, he said, forged in hard hours of trial and sealed in such conditions, will never be broken. - 8B COAL MINES WORKERS' WAGES EXAMINED WASHINGTON, Aug. 13.-The President has ordered the mixed committee of mine owners and miners, constituted to examine wages, to meet at Cleveland, for the purpose of discussing the wages established by the Coal Commission. The Commission, responding to the orders of the President, met this afternoon. UNFAVORABLE BALANCE SHEET FOR JAPAN'S FOREIGN TRADE WASHINGTON, Aug. 13.-The United States Trade Attaché at Tokyo has reported to the Department of Commerce that during the first few months of 1920 Japan's trade with foreign countries has shown an unfavorable balance of : fi250,00Q,000. -RWA YOU& August áf-El -WbM dO tos domestic and interna- ¡ dMMlOs balloons which were to leave Indiana- ; palta, September 11 and 23, will be held in Chicago. EIGHT REVOLVER SHOTS FIRED AT VENIZELOS PARIS, Aug. 13.- .Venizelos, who was leaving this evening for Nice, has been the victim of an attack. Two individuals fired eight revolver shots at him, wounding him, but not seriously. The assailants, who were arrested, were Lieutenant of Engineers George Kyriolis and Thcrafis Apsotos, correspondent of the "Journal de la Bourse" newspaper. The assailants have stated that their purpose was to rid Greece of an oppressor. H nptr HÉndíz "Ululo" The great Dutch steamer Almélo, 11,000 tons, arrived in this port today direct from Amsterdam, with a very important cargo "^ABONOS." ' She will probably leave Monday afternoon for the Dominican Capital and J'cvañi about one hundred passengers from San Juan. Thanks to lp" efforts of its Agents, it was possible to get the Royal Dutch Mala to give the authorization to make this special shipment, thus solving the problem of the great agglomeration of passengers wishing to embark for the neighboring Republic. The Almete will continue its route to Coton and ports in Peru and Chile, via the Panama Canal. JÓBlfiAllOEN ■■premiere in Puerto Rico of the first GERmAn films that have been shown in the TAWA AMERICA, from the "HHHHtA. -HOT- "ARADO 13 - HOT-Adventures DNLOAPI ; TAXHAMSEN" Psamia w tiaóo fictos. MtaJÁ soto ^rational tramé M "teírtta taWW""h y ¡M últímta t^Édos oZr blanuo* - ■ Utototo-nt DOaOHGO 14 -Maltona - : "Wmda-peúa GERMAN EHWBNCSMt drama pto Paul Rp asWMito A í dem of the celebrated dotecmmó* isAunv waomML -. WWAMT ñafiteó -fiífitaMk do SU oseo-, q^raadaa ~ ¿ _ 1 ^Advt J fe I '
A visit to the Docberitz camp, in Germany.
Almost at the gates of Berlin, for the distance can be covered in little more than half an hour by train or automobile, is the place where the famous marine brigade commanded by Colonel Erhardt and some other resolutely Pan-Germanist military continents are encamped. The Docberitz camp occupies a vast expanse of land dotted with large, well-built barracks, some of which are used to house soldiers and others to store food and war material. In special and well-chosen places, pavilions are erected to serve as residence for the officers. Everything is surrounded by a real wall of barbed wire, with machine-gun posts and other defenses and a good number of sentries to avoid any kind of surprise. Inside the camp there is a constant flurry of activity, but there is no sign of any impending demobilization. It seems that the troops are among the best in the Empire; many of the soldiers wear war decorations, and the officers, also covered with crosses and medals, are mostly of the old Prussian type. It is understandable that the Government considers the existence of these military forces almost at the gates of the capital to be a dangerous threat. Positively they have announced that both the marine brigade and the other contingents stationed at Docberitz will be disarmed and discharged, threatening to use force if necessary; but it is no less certain that Colonel Erhardt's troops pay no attention to the orders of the Government, so that it may be asked what forces Berlin would employ in the event of the Docberitz contingents refusing to be disarmed. and Erhardt's soldiers, indeed, take their demobilization for a joke. Who is going to discharge us? -They say, and immediately speak of the difficulties of civilian life in Germany, while in the army there is the security of daily food and a corresponding salary. Moreover, and this is an important fact, it is known that the marine brigade has considerable funds at its disposal which would enable it to sustain itself for a long time, even if the Berlin Government were to suspend the subsidies. The soldiers admit that Colonel Erhardt and his officers have political opinions totally different from those of the Government, but they admit that their chiefs are very good and take care of the welfare of their men; It is said that Colonel Bischoff, the right-hand man of General Luttivits, has been in the camp at Docberitz to discuss the political situation with the officers of the Marine Brigade. The fact is that the camp at Docberitz is attended by many chiefs and officers of the REISWEHR and of the BAmco troops, and all those who have already been sent to the camp are being assembled. T " < ' - " ■ CenwciwtBsMViww Atoes to buy; * - - - -' Bv*"!** AveaRto y^OG^toMDto RDAdock y Foltock, Aronquos AÉjorto", AW. "a in saces, and yi züiod|Mto of arito** tto of nuesfro xamo, "Ajos nMMbGo^ha^ . > MERMA*" ¿He É- ódwt - a "Hato de metor 7R^W "dito"^
The mysterious crime "i t|iffi figure I a Puerto Rican coflodMjovon.
New York newspapers continue to publish reports of the mysterious death of Dr. Jose Arenas in the apartment he occupied, 70th Street. 4 'There are only two eyewitness accounts,' says one newspaper, 'which paint the tragedy in all the colors of a crime of passion. But these witnesses shed no light and everything leads one to believe that it was a suicide. The police, amidst a welter of musings and suppositions, wonder: Why did Dr. Arenas, a few moments before his death, buy a suit that cost him $75 in a clothing store on Broadway?'' 'And why did he state on different occasions that he intended to move to South America, where his mother and sister live? It has also been learned that Dr. Arenas stated to Mrs. John Silvers that he intended to go to Cuba in order to marry a woman he left there. If the theory that Dr. Arenas committed suicide is accepted, why are Ignacio Marti, Juan Maldonado and Ruth Jackson still alive?' 'Dr. Arenas obtained his degree at the "Broadway" in "Broadway". Arenas obtained his degree in "the University of Bogota, moved shortly after to the United States with the purpose of exploring the 'eonócimeírtok Once in the TíféCtópoli he established amorous relations with the chorus girl Ruth Jackson, with whom he lived for some time, abandoning her later, ashamed of having loved that woman. Arenas moved to 70th Street, where he gave orders to his maid not to allow any suspicious woman to enter his room. Dr. Arenas wanted to avoid meeting the showgirl Jackson. But on Saturday night he was conversing with a young man by the name of Maldonado, to whom he expressed his displeasure with the chorus girl, when he suddenly saw her enter, accompanied by the young Puerto Rican Ignacio Marti. As soon as they entered Dr. Arenas' room, the artist asked him for the devotion" of her dresses and other garments, which Arenas still kept. The young Marti, who is, by the way, the central witness of the tragedy, has declared to the New York police, how Dr. Arenas entered his bedroom, returning shortly after with a revolver and firing shots at Jackson, whom he wounded in the neck. Martí has also stated that a projectile wounded him in the arm'derocho, and explained graph-, mente, the rise in which DrArenas, valiendo d arma contra si, । uto.'■ i ■ । । । । '■■yn
i shot a guy, iLooking instan-^ ! taneously. < , " z Marti says he drove Jack- i son. gushing bloodj|hl hospital of ' Roosez'tlt, from where<K she was transferred- i da to the BeUemto clinic. x . Martí limited himself only to explain this aspect of the traSedia; perd, on the other hand, has said nothing about the reasons that exist for the ■ Dr. Arenas to appear lying on the floor, with five buttons of his underwear detached and all his garters torn off, as if, apparently, he had sustained a fight <®n some per- æsthetist.
s. Nor has it been possible to explain why the objects in Dr. Arenas' room were found scattered in the dream, and the strange noise heard moments before the tragedy by Mr. Silver and his wife, Mr. Silver and his wife. If Arenas committed suicide, as some witnesses claim, how is the lu^ha described by some ve- < cinos and which they claim to have heard from their rooms explained? MÚ£ Jackson has stated that the'! Dr. Árrikas stated to him on a certain day í that he had murdered a .man in 1 Cuba. This statement of the artist has heefa-> that a detective . be sent to that Republic, to investigate; ' what is true in this disclosure.... Martí^ba also stated how I was able to jump out of a window to í . escape certain death. Ma- ¡ nifestú that, once outside, he heard, the | ayes '^dti'la Jackson and decided to defen-1.
Din. MMirls l^hr diBtmj Last night,tos momeatns of I in preusa pete atetto nqgé to aueitaos I ears the very sad ñutí ría of the fiígri- I atíetoo of the distinguished lady dada I Amneris Tmetier da Bueno, deapafc da I haber ■"(-■?nin a hafeemedaf tun I cruel edOdolar "** ~ I In -vaqe our smy q^eridq cem- | pafiero toa" Alejandro^Boato, aduriMa- I toador MUNDO, nadó 1 riñosa Míi#ad airetotor del Me|D W' I ■u nobto. Í| " all the "teMí lades of to clenrrí, .who tachare* 'tom"- I dadamm^ó to save M exim-^ to fl the digSMga daaa" Ra vain toan* | tedios tor efforts d* tos ■ÍMyf 1 the pia4toáh£Kn of the toposo in tocpb W i tocho oáde La amorto, in h"""""""" *- *8"* I te sa ajunUtond" pará stoto I pre a la ü "Miíwi "edp hitada - Mr B
~ " rRÚiPLuaa lift 3
' derla- So, he returned to Dr. Arenas' room, where he ~encountered the seriously injured chorus girl. That 'immediately his first thought was to transfer her to one of the city hospi tal. which he did with the help of! policeman Walters, who carried the wounded woman to the nearest hospital, where she remained confined. Afterwards, when she had recovered a little, she made the following statements: --That she is not so sorry for what happened.
■j
In ¿ fotograba "-sees how the young Puerto Rican Ignacio "Martí was able to jump out the window (1) of the house of - doctor'Arenas, and rushed in search of the young Ruth Jackson, at the entrance of the room (2).
She could now live in peace, since on several occasions Dr. Arenas had tried to kill her. Here are her own words: "Every time I told him I wanted to leave him, he warned me to shoot myself". In Dr. Arenas' room, the authorities found a letter he had begun to write to a friend living in Cuba, a copy of the book Ibis, by Vargas Vila, and some items of clothing. According to police investigations, the real name of the protagonist of the tragedy is Elmer Schultz, and she is the wife of a cab driver in Toledo. . As soon as the authorities ordered the removal of the body, and once the huge blood pool had been washed away, the owner of the property has made it available again to any inquirer.
11.0 - 1 Amneri" Lexpier de Bo±zo ■ H DIED LAST NIGHT AT 8 ll:g5, AFTER EH BECOME THE ■ . : ' . ■ SAWOS SACRAMENTS ' fl x B Atoja^ro Bezzo; his father, dea Rdeimiro X Oto- fl ■ *!"■> bamauos, political hanBanos and other fiches and the sus- . M ¿teto da "EL MUNDO" y 7PUERTO RICO ILUSTRADO to- ■ B ^vitaa parq la trasiacM. del cadáver acto quo se emificato a les H "toco da sato tarde as el "■ untarte da San Juan, par cuyepiado- fl - ■ ■ ■ Cana-Jtortáorte. RlOto "SL ' ' '.A' -c .1. ■" fla^n^naM,^'' *. nótate M, taco EHE '' NosezopartmWtoias. fl
LOOK UnOW^HVá ¿ \ - - - r Z= 1 í -' '■ ■■■ .... 4* Us CRton doriaró te gWúA-d íAmM" y - MMialit " - . , ■ . . .r-'-'-'- y - - ' - '"■■-a; RftA .... "■ 1 .. 1 1 ' 2. .. .. - Sil" ,5
The festivities to j receive the acora- i 'i zade Alfonso XHÍ J THE COMMERCE OF SAN JUAN. 1 j "7óda s the stores of San Juan have ' ■ begun to adorn their establcunien- j 1 1 ¡tes and stained glass windows with htimem flags í ' '; Spanish flags and artistic inscriptions,' i welcoming tos brave hi- 1 1 1 jos of Spain, whose love, for their two-! I eendicntes of America, has been pte-' ■ namente demonstrated at this moment' i tostoneo, in which after vétate! > "ñor, we return to hold them close to our hearts! "The Opera', has harbored a beautiful to- í trero on one of its stained glass windows that reads: ■ "Im Opera' greets the 'ñifoneo XIII'\ j Gonzalez Fadin's store. the same- 1 mo as others more, has adorned its windows with artistic li indar is Spanish > Iza । In railroad station boasts j throughout its building more than one hundred American and Spanish hunde ; rs and pennants. According to rumors circulating ay* j late, the "Casino Español" of San' Juan is diipuriio to offer a pro- i mine to the ert a ble cimiento that will most artis- i tically adorn its glassy < THE SHIPPING HOUSES All the shipping houses are willing to give up the steamers they have in the bay so that the public can go to fecibér, on the high seas, the Spanish battleship. The "MARINA" >. steamer ^Marina", dq 1% "^E", ~ 9E~*properly. is being repa&ade in these days, displays, in a rhimrneo, the colors of the flag arpiñéis East, like the other ships that are in the bay the drasingo. will go to receive. out to sea to the "Alfonso XHI". It is worthy of applause the oiliness of Mr. Such and of all the "managers" of the shipping houses for such a patriotic proceeding. vn 'smanam of colors ADORN THE PIER NO. 2. On the rear front of the referred' tto elle the "Bul! Insular Line" has co' touched 670 bulbs it cotoros, in 1 cemhmieito beautifully, which highlights, once again, d exquisite gm-. te of the lupmtatr luiente den Miguel Such. . <>m extraordinary art, change me 1 the words WELCOME, coa that 1 the. "Bull" salutes the commander, ed1 ciality and crew of the battleship "AL " feamo XHI". | I*s-tests of the ünaataacióu dtaren' proved admirable. The whole mo| ; can be mis beautiful, per which ftii-< ' cite ti teñm tarnh. . A NEW MUEU^- ' The "Bull Insular Une Esc." has ' the purpose of constructing a new mutile, qne will be ti No 7, panela car' ga and discharge Ta has been acquired all ti tara , not nermaris at stop 2 and modin, and I are already Natas tas planee, to empoI zar the cenatauteión at once. I p active and luguriartp iqi tetra I i rata, don ICguel Such, m ti teiriadar I of the maguíñra work.
I MBo- < I 7 N SoHcAb fncífl H RC®. DE L, VHXAM1L * - ", ' i- ' -■" -- ' iiM. ■
The Council of ; national defense i appeals to the world (BY CAELE FRENCH) V j WARSAW. August IX-The Council of National Defense has published an appeal addressed to all the peoples of the world, stating that Poland will never accept a dishonorable peace and will defend itself to the last. The appeal ends by saying that the crushing of Poto 'toa will unleash a series of heca- ! tumbes which will surpass anything that has been seen through the Hysteria ' THE BOLSHEVIKIS DO NOT ANSWER | WARSAW. augftel3 -The prinop" 'Sapiera has telegraphed to the Minister of ! IT elations of Rama. M | Tchítctaiím, asking the reasons, i that have had tos "soviets" for not I send their representatives to the coufe- . rence proposed by tos Poles. STRICT COLLABORATION BETWEEN ' THE GOVERNMENTS OF FRANCE AND ENGLAND. PARIS, August IX-The Chargé d'Affaires d'Inglateara has handed over to the French and English Governments a letter from the British Embassy in Paris. Negotiations of England has delivered [today to the Secretary General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs a memorandum of the British Government's । of the exchange of views between the President of England, Mr. Andea Ion, and the President of France, Mr. Andea Ion, and the President of France, Mr. Andea Ion. Andea ion and Mr. Patootogna of France resulted that the two countries were willing to come to an agreement, in a spirit of friendship, and to be dteiided by the eu_oni iai rows that had arisen between the two governments, which, if they were not made, would impede collaboration and would in turn damage the friendly relations between the two governments. Mr. MiDerand was informed eu Montdidiar of this interview U bala iMncifii MGaasM He Cite i ~ i Our distinguished amago the na' cuito cabáUcro don Gustavo Afeam, Consul of Cuba in San Juan, has made in^raTr an artistic alumu*?- - ción in the part of the front of his offices. located in the street of Te^ tuán. The beautiful coat of arms of Cuba is haloed by a beautiful sea of electric light bulbs of different colors, in the very center of the ituI minariño. which extends along all the cornices and ends of the three windows that form the front of the house. Mr. Alvarez has wanted to contribute in some way to the reception and to the festivities that these portot tiqraños are preparing to receive the bizarre sailors from Iberia who tomorrow will arrive in our p!a Se pKbd J fame botnrae". A CARAZO. Brau St. 72. Advt. NOTICE Parttrtpam!" to the pñhliin qra book do all gi rvomra and tirttliuadi te confada, taraos purchased ol sotar Enriqra Gracia Górnuo and tetara Maria Lipra ti Hotel "Mgte XX". tetando ra Ib oteo IW, mitemn ", ol eral tacóte irtormió! compltearanrte dMkv corara uuu hatera y wofifladas tahítactotao y toraida rav regalar. Preeres aa^Mtata mídirra Boa Juan. T. R_. ir do carato, i" WB TGMAR BOUS A MAXIMO DUNAM Advt.
-rePU 1 - oÓWfl-O-H- ÓX. wWiDfi 2 MW O WOOOé , I r Afimí XB|, j ■ ! ' * * ■ J Úll I 1^1 <í I ^ " p<w1<"4orub6jR dwtraÍ "* b "*if F*- H - ' Lr* rn V oafidfan tin (Mflte DSPR "IPS WÑSBOSR. í I " .... "z - y - y - < * ■-i Tm^m ^n aara'ediaNmL ' ' ' ■h JPed^SckhetAG". .