THE ATONDO DAILY MORNING PAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
10 pages 3 ctvs. j | Semester, $4.00 I One year, $.7.50 ¡ i i i
i Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 ¡ Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING NEWSPAPER, ^4
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO II
I SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
"i guama*, waa "UtmbotM uuu.br puenit (No. 801) aniKcrUied by tf*" . AM of oetvbor 8 1917. on fila at tha Post Offiea of Baa Jean. Puzto ' Rico the pr-a Rnrlaann F-wta,aat "r General
i ' Linared a" "anead "Uae mauer, t e b r u a r y 31, 1 9 1 9 9 , > i -* tza Peat Ottes at Baa faan. Porte Riño, (United I : "itere" "f 4raericzl rnl" the del ot march 8, 1879.
|SA8ADO OCTOBER 30, 1920. |
NUMBER 526,
The King of Spain will leave shortly for Cuba Very serious symptoms of rebellion in Scotland.
Judgment against "Porto Rico Fertilizer Company".
LOWERING PRICES
SUMMER CLOTHING Japanese Silk Suits kq nn of $40-00 meirjs 20'> <|W£eVVV English Alpaca Suits ?no nn of $875.00 less 30'1 ^¿O.VV
Dictated by the Oírte in the suit brought by Don Pedro Gandia.
WOOL CLOTHING $37-50 . Kirschbaum suits fro cn 5 of $4000 men'" 20''? $*j£e "JV.
SECTION FIRST. f PEDRO GANDIA. Plaintiff. i VS. PORTO RICO FERTILIZER CO., Defendant. No. 944*3- । Dividend envelope, etc- > i OPINION. ei trial having been held and Ia< 1 evidence, consisting of testimonial and documentary, of the state of it, the Cor ' te has come to the following concia- ■ sions. i That the plaintiff is the owner of the ¡ shares of the Porto Rico Fertilizer j Co-, to which the dtmanoi is contracted, of which it does not appear from the evidence ei: Mr. Gandía is detached in ¡ some form, having proved his right of ownership with the certificate "i and incorporation and with the amendments to the" clauses of incorporation of the defendant, which he presented as secondary evidence, and for not having presented the original titles of said shares in spite of having been required to do so by this Court at the request of the plaintiff. : , The deed of dissolution and liqui- ¡ ¡ j daeión of Fi mercantile "Gandía * , Stubbe~, by stipulating that ei Mr. Gan- | ] day undertakes to sell his shares to | - his partner Mr. Stubbe, at the price of -a ¡ ■ par, is evidence that Mr. Stubbe i : you consider i as such owner ai Mr. Gan i , day. not being able to refer -sa promise sa of sale to ¡as accione^ of the pro- i < piety of the merentil "Gandía 4 Stub- 1 . he" which corresponded to! Mr. Gan t day, in his capacity as sect- í . These, as can be seen from > । the same deed, were attached to Mr. Stubbe, as can be seen from the inventory and from ■ , the adjudication, and it is also recorded pro 1 hado that Pedro Gandía and Johann D. Stubbe. The said Johann D. Stubbe, who formed the corporate firm ("Gandía a Stubbe", are the same persons who then constituted the ■ management and government of the P rto Rico' Fertilizer Co-: as well as that the said Johann D. Stubbe controlled the agreements and business of the given plaintiff. To counter the evidence pre : seated by the plaintiff, the plaintiff, among other evidence, submitted for the Court's consideration an agreement entered into on June 20, 1913. Between the Virginia Carolina Che- ■ mical Company, and Gandia 4 Stubbe, t Headaches come from Jos poisons intesdnalet Take U<L DR- ROSS'S LIFE PILDORAS j to download sw . ¡ ■theses and you will feel your head clear * ' Arriso No 3K- i * Se plisa and forran botone*, d A CARAZO, Brau St 72. d Advt. H AitMíillu Pitret-Amw We are pleased to advise that the PIERCE- ARROW last sold are now arriving, in case there is anyone who wants The PIERCE > ARROW is a car that not everyone can buy, because it is high priced, due to its high quality. - Its current price is between $9,000 to $10,000. - COME SEE IT - PIETRANTONI & SO JO PSsm-Anww Dept.
1 document which was objected to by the plaintiff, as appearing on several sheets of c'-pia. paper, with different types of type, and one page without collation: owing to such circumstances, the Court has to accept this document with some misgivings, but even giving it its full value and harmonizing it with the other evidence, we do not see how this document dated July 20, 1993, can destroy the facts of the case. The facts contained in the articles of incorporation subscribed and sworn to by the plaintiff, by Johann B. Stubbe and by Hector Cestero and Frederick Stubbe, the facts stated in the amendments to said articles of incorporation, written and executed three years later, and in the deed of dissolution and liquidation of the mercantile company "Gandia 4 Stubbe", as far as the matter is concerned, can be destroyed by this document. And with regard to these sworn statements of the said Johann D. Stubbe'. and Federico Stubbe'. the Court cannot give credit to the "i m ce larations of these witnesses, nor to Arturo Trias who was then, according to :..a receivable proí "Jo. the secretary of the C'?rporaciun demanda'la. It also appears from the evidence that: : ' dividend distributed to jas aeciunes belonging to the marcantii Gandí;. a Stubb'*, nso itante a S1Ó.4GS-12, appears in the inventory as In pertenencia of ia societiati, and adjudicated tic a by half between Io.~ partners, corre-spondido'.e to Mr- Gandía ¡a sum i of ^S234.ñ "k < ho thousand two hundred and thirty > four dollars six cents; >. Accordingly, the Court is of the opinion that the complaint should be upheld, ordering the Por to Rico Fertilizer Company to pay to the plaintiff the sum :e< SS234-0t> - which its dividend was divided into two, plus interest on the said sum at six per cent per annum from February 2, 1917, and to maintain on its stock and stock transfer books in the plaintiff's name and name. the sixty-four dollars in the name of the plaintiff, and to keep on its stock and stock transfer books the sixty-four dollars in the name of the plaintiff. The sixty shares of stock of the defendant corporation, and to hold and consider the plaintiff as one of the stockholders for the sixty shares in question, and to pay him the dividends to be distributed by reason of the profits obtained by the company, and to order the defendant to pay the costs. Mr. Secretary will record a judgment in due form in accordance with this opinion. San Juan. P. R. October 28. 1920 Luis CAMPILLOJudge. See. la. AN APPOINTMENT The Governor appointed Don Manuel Irizarry judge of Sabana Grande. The appointment has been a wise one
Styleplus suits eon nn Dt Í40 minus 20 par percent. VvZi UV For Gentlemen
Palm Beach gg Tatfes healed and colors. For Gentlemen
Gonzalez Radin Co. Saz Juz - Peace - Mayagaez.
The Allies demand that Germany deliver ; 275,000 tons more in merchant ships An explosive machine burst in a convent in Barcelona.
- (ENGLISH CABLE) SL BATTLESHIP ALFONSO XIII"! - j CGNDLVLRA AL BEY TO HAVANA i ' i MADRID October 28. -The important newspaper "A. B. C.", one of the best informed in Spain, announces today that the battleship "Alfonso XIII" is preparing to take King Alfonso XIII to Havana. Some. months ago the Spanish sovereign showed lively desires to visit America but his trip ■ , je was postponed because don Al- ¡ ' fonso had to attend to matters of I great in/portannia. and his presence was I i necessary in the Peninsula, for then the events of Barcelo- 5 na and the unionist uprisings occurred. । But it seems that the great welcome given in Cuba to the "Alfonso XIII" aroused in the Monarch new desires to visit America and to this effect, it is now announced that the trip is about to take place. J The news of the visit of the Key has ■ j produced in Havana a l ( ! delirious enthusiasm. All the Spanish societies, as well as the Cuban and foreign ones, are ready to give the So- ¡ í berano a lavish and unsurpassable reception. THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS HAS BEEN SHATTERED. The President of the League of Nations, Mr. Burgeois, delivered an eloquent speech before the closing ceremony, speaking on the great work accomplished by the League of Nations, and also explained the aims of the League of Nations. He also explained the purposes of that high body and the significance of its program. i Moments before the closing of the session it was agreed to transfer the funds of the League of Geneva. > ROME, October 28. -This morning I visited the Vatican, Mons.
Archbishop Felix Guei of Santiago. The Sum ! Pontiff, who conferred about d ' an hour with the Cuban PrelacK*, was iu í tere so much for the situation in Cuba t NEXT WEEK THE STRIKE WILL BE OVER LONDON, Oct. 28.-The serious question created by the hne ■ ga of miners and which ^n-intended ei i constantly startled for many days : : the whole nation. It is espy* that the strikeg; ' will be settled next week. The leaders will tomorrow present to the workers the latest offer of the Government, and the general impression is that it will be accepted without discussion by the strikers. Prime Minister Lloyd Georgie has issued a letter from one of the Directors of the strike movement, in which he states that the miners are prepared to enter into negotiations with the Government. These statements have been favorably received by the newspapers and it is believed that on this occasion the conflict will be definitively resolved, so that, according to rumor, a new organization will be started in such a way as to make the continuation of the strikes impossible in the future. BASE BALL CLUBS TO BE REORGANIZED CHICAGO, Oct. 28. -The scandal produced by the players of "ba" bail" and in which the judicial authorities had to intervene, drowned at first the enthusiasm that existed in the "AMERICA" THEATER The most comfortable. The coolest ESTA NOCHE ESTA NOCHE Gran Retreta por los Niños de la BANDA DE BENEFICENCIA Premiere in Puerto Rico of the stupendous drama in six acts by BERNARD DURNING "Sacrificio Premiado" (English and Spanish Titles) ESTA TABDE ESTA TARDE INAUGURACION MATINEE At two and four o'clock. PRICES:-Ground Floor 10 cts. Upper Floor..... 15 cts Tomorrow Sunday INAUGURATION x "M A T I N A L" At 10:30 A. M. PREMIERE IN PUERTO RICO "El Supremo Juez" With the same program of the evening. THURSDAY 4 DEBUT THURSDAY 4 DEBUT THURSDAY 4 From the Famous Company "Olimpian Troup" Singing, Dancing. Acrobats, Plastic Figures, Variety CROSAS * CO. (Businessmen)
j among the "base ball" players, te. i m i ming that the favorite "sport" des i appeared. But at a meeting held today, it was agreed to continue the work to reorganize the base ball clubs, and a resolution was passed by which all those present pledged themselves to work to keep the enthusiasm for the sport alive throughout the country. J porte I DUBLIN--McSwiney's body will be taken directly to Cork, where it will be buried. 1 BARCELONA---An honiLti col >- . cada in a convent burst- The damage done is considerable. i THE BARCELONA STUDENTS AGAIN ATTACK THE ENGLISH CONSULATE | BARCELONA, October 28.- The student riots continue. Irish sympathizers have attacked ■ for the second time the British Consulate. i Since the last attack on the British building the situation is much improved, but remains uncertain THE TOKYO STOCK EXCHANGE HAS CLOSED. TOKYO, Oct. 28.-The Stock Exchange closed today. Silk is down considerably. GROUP OF EXTREMISTS EXERCISE IN MILITARY SERVICE GLASGOW, Oct. 29 -Police surprised numerous groups of extremists exercising in military service. On this occasion the Government has taken rigorous precautions to prevent any uprising. Rumors are circulating that the police have captured a group of conspirators. 275,000 TONS MORE FOR THE ALLIES PARIS, Oct. 28.-The Reparations Commission ordered the German Government to deliver to the Allies 275,000 tons of ships in payment for the surrender of the squadron at Sepa Flow. TRANSFER BL FIGARO The barber shop EL FIOAEO advises its numerous customers in San Juan and the Island, that it has moved to the front ( from where it was before. i Pedro TRUJILLO GUIL
We inform our relatives and friends that we have moved from Alien Street No. 56, to our new location at Isabel II Street No. 5, in front of the Cuarentenario Hospital, Marina. PEREZ HERMANOS. S. en C. - Tel 285, Box 221 tf LA VELOCE" j ¡> Navigazione Italiana a Vapore - Genova. o ¡ ¡ * Italian steamer "SAVOIA" is expected in this port about < ► 3 lo. November and will be dispatched for Puerto Pía- < > 3 ta, R. D.; Port-au-Prince, Haiti; Santiago de Cuba and Haba_ o na, Cuba; and Veracruz, Mexico. Will admit cargo for the o í > aforementioned ports. < [ jo For further information contact 3 I BEHN BROTHERS, INC, AGTS. | i ■ - - -=
POTATOES- RICE ■ ONIONS i WE OFFER AT LIBERAL PRICES p. l. cormiéfFFcompany Cristo 16 j - - - - Telephone 859 SAN JUAN.
Today Saturday The beautiful comedy Sehction "THIRTY THOUSAND DOLLARS" by J. Warren Kerrigan and the 5th to. epúodio of "Alive or ¡i W B Dead." Tomorrow Sunday .-Great Function. Debut of loe BUFOS CUBANOS. Eeta company is composed of 9 artietae of am - S W B boe eexoe. replete Tnnrn, etc Do not miss. Let's take advantage of the joy of living. The orqueeta will be apro- ¡| ^^B m piodamente refonada. Come on time if you want to get baen seat. PRICES:-Lunet*s 40 ct*. Balconies 26 ct*. - - - - -
General Mr s Me Intyre's ride on the Island. ¡ -■ ■ - ■■■■ ■ .... I-
General is pleased with the attentions he has received. i .
! I Thursday afternoon returned from | His short excursion on the island Gene i ral Me Intyre, who was accompanied ¡ by his two secretaries, the Governor's beautiful daughter, Miss Diana, and the Licúo. The General, whom we saw yesterday at the Fortress, is very pleased with the attentions he has received wherever he has gone. The General and his companions then proceeded along the central road. । i Before arriving at Aibonito, General ; Me Intyre stopped briefly at the summer residence of the illustrious 1 ; President of the Supreme Court, Don I : Joosá C. Hernández.-to whom he is united by a very cordial and long-standing friendship, -and they exchanged affectionate greetings, i In Portee, at the "Club Deportivo", a large crowd awaited him, among whom was the Mayor, Mr. del Valle. I ñor del Valle, who welcomed him on behalf of the people of Ponce. . Don Antonio R Barceló, who was in Ponce on political matters, greeted the high military man at the same Club, exchanging views with him about his impressions. ■ .'sions of the Island. AT THE HOTEL "MELIA" I A splendid luncheon was given to the General and his companions at the hotel "Melia", which was attended by the most prestigious people of the city, and beautiful speeches of welcome and praise were given to the General, who also pronounced some phrases. IN MAYAGUEZ i On Wednesday afternoon the- í omi ' tiva went to Mayaguez, spending the 1 j night at the residence of Mr. May. of ! the "Experimental Station," where ! de were very well attended to by the ■ owners of the house, who were lavished with hospitality for the visii t before. -- i i . 'i THE CAPTAIN I3F THE Schooner "ROSALIA" WAS BONDED FOR $5,000 ■ Yesterday was brought to San Juan by the Marshall of the Federal Court the former captain of the schooner "Ro-alia", who appeared before the Court to answer to various charges made against him in connection with the loss of the schooner "Rosalia", which was lost off the coast of the United States, and which was found to have been in the hands of a former captain of the schooner "Rosalia". The captain of the "Rosalía", which sailed off the coast of Ha-, ! tillo a few weeks ago, and of which he was duly accused. | The captain of the "Rosalia," Gus- f d favo Fernandez, who was under a $500 bond, has had it raised to $5,000. The Federal Court is making a thorough investigation of the facts. PREMIER CAR Model 1918 I am selling a Premier five seat car, in perfect condition. | OSCAR D. O'NEILL. Box 11, San Juan. Advt.
i । IN LARES ! Thursday morning the Zionist exeur left M.iyaguez, continuing on to Lares. In this city, as in Ponce, the people received them with great enthusiasm. i The worthy gentleman Don Pablo Vilo |lla, a veteran of the civic struggles of - ¡ Puerto Rico, placed his beautiful residence at the disposal of the visitors, to whom he offered a magintu u almud- ; zo. Hours later the exeur" 1 sionists departed for Aguadilla, Arecibo, etc. The General was then on his way back to this city to attend the reception which, in the General's honor, was given at 1,1 Porta. ' leza the Governor. THE RECEPTION ¡ Very beautiful was the reception which was attended by the Governor's worthy family, personalities from the Government, the Banking, the Exercise, Commerce, etc., and a large number of ladies of our high society. Several officers of the Iberian battleship "España" also attended, and were presented by Mr. Rodriguez to the Governor, who was very pleased that the sons and daughters of glorious Spain were taking part in the beautiful act. After the reception, the bai le began, which lasted until after twelve o'clock. The Band of the 65th" enlivened the hours of solace and recreation. He is likely to leave on Monday We were informed yesterday at La Fortaleza that the General will leave Puerto Rico, probably on Monday, on board the transport "Cantigny", which is coming on Sunday, according to what we have been informed. 'BET $1500 FOR A DISTRICT TRIUMPH Hatillo, Oct. 29, 1920. ¡EL MUNDO. San Juan. As ''El Tiempo" counts on the Dto. of Hatillo, Camuy, Quebradillas for its party, I bet S1500 that Dr. Alum, Unionist candidate, will defeat the Republican-Socialist candidate of this District, with the condition, that whoever । wins will give away his total amount to the Hospii tal of this District. J J. Ruiz SOLER. I - | DO YOU WANT TO SELL, buy or mortgage any rustic or urban land or do you have money to invest? We guarantee the titles We sell and buy shares of central and C npoiacions. PORTO RICO REAL ESTATE & BROKERS CO. TEL. 477 P. O. BOX 886 Advt ' WE OFFER । Galvanized zinc ribbed LEGITIMATE ENGLISH Twisted square rods all dimensions. COMPAÑIA INDUSTRIAL DE SANTURCE Pedro Bolivar S. en C. BOX 250. TEL. 425. JMtMKlUiMUIWHIUllMMIUilUHIlilMinlltUMItMHHMMHIlaiiHimW' i AUTOMOBILES j É For sale a CADILLAC and I f a HAYNES, very cheap, j i but cash. f = Will inform - ? j BENITO ZALDUONDO, | f San Justo 13-15. San Juan. |