IT I. MLINININO
10 page" 3 ctvs, Saméatra, $4.00 A alio, $.7.50
ni i." " ■■ "rt" Offices: Salvador Brau, $1 Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345.
MORNING DAILY.
FXCEPT SUNDAYS.
YEAR II |I
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO j
S Published and distributed! under pernit (No. SOI) October ", 191 San Juan. Porto Rieo. By order of the President. A. S. B "Xlet.>n ; - P<>Mwit""er Uen-ral. 1. february 21. 1919. at the Pest Ofled at San Juan. Porto Ri e<y-bailed States of Amenee u
Í7, on "Je "t thJ^Poat ^Ofáee of 1 Entered at* ^ec-und class matter, I under the Ac£ ef mareji f
I < SATURDAY, DECEMBER 18, 1920. |
NUMBER 567.
Serious resolution prese^t against England The Atlantic opened, forming a gigantic mountain.
TOYS AND GIFTS The best". We have them on purpose for all family, friends and relatives. Keep in mind that as you comply, ellcs will reciprocate ® i A little attention with their servers, costs very little and they ' i : : : : esteem you very much : : : VISIT US, YOU DON'T NEED TO Spend A LOT - I ' i ./ Gonzalez Padin Co.,- Inc. 5 I SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGUEZ -P---- ------*
Interesting manifestaeiones acercacade the reforms in the electric cars ' i ■
.1 WHAT DON MANUEL V. DOMENECH Yesterday we visited Don Manuel V. Domenech, director of the ''Porto Rico Railway Light and Power Co.'', whom we questioned about the projected improvements in the electric cars and about the construction of the double track, which, as our readers know, is part of the Company's reform plans. Thanks to the efforts of Mr. Domenech we are able to gather today the interesting news, which the inhabitants of San Juan will receive with jubilation, that the Company proposes to improve the present electric car service in a way that will not have to compare at all with that of the great cities of both worlds. -What are the purposes of the' Company on the occasion of its recent I application to build part of the double track? -In answer to that question I must inform you that we have certain plans for improving the electric streetcar service. I presume that your question refers rather to works of a permanent nature requiring capital investment than to simple repair or maintenance works. Although we have under study, in general, a project for the extension of the trolley system by building the double track, and for various new construction works which are indispensable to provide the city with a modern transportation system, such a project has not yet been approved by the Board of Directors of the Company. It has long been known that the
! known that the construction of the double track on the Central Highway is dispensable if it is to establish a faster, higher-capacity transportation system than the one we have in the city. Unfortunately, during the last few years, and especially since the middle of 1914 when the foreign war began, the additional investment of dineic from the capital account has been out of the question, because of the impossibility of raising funds through the sale of the Company's bonds, and because the net income of the Company has been so meager during this period that it has not been possible to purchase goods at the present market price. We buy now because we do not believe that prices, in the class of items we sell, will fall any further. While we are buying, all the items in our store are selling at much lower prices than a few months ago. In short, the current prices are so attractive, we can't believe you will resist buying now. These prices, of course, refer to Christmas and New Year's items, among which you can find great gifts of your own for gentlemen. And backing up the true value of the item itself is our guarantee of quality and satisfaction. SWIGGETT BBOTHEBS. San Juan, P. B. Advt
- r dido to have new works done by paying for them - out of current income. It is also r ' true that until not long ago - 3 there was nothing to indicate the conve- ! However, the decline in bus competition in recent months has been reflected in the revenue of our trolley division, and if we were sure that this state of affairs would be permanent, then there would undoubtedly be justification for the investment of new capital to support the trolley service. In the absence of such assurance, the amount of money to be invested in new trains and improvements must be strictly limited by the amount of annual revenue we expect to have, since there is nothing to indicate that the market conditions for the sale of bonds of the public service railroad companies will improve in the near future. ' We realize, therefore, that - a limited investment of funds i should be used for the greatest possible benefit and to serve the . । most urgent needs. Accordingly, I have recommended to the Com- . company the purchase of our rolling stock ■; and the construction of that .! section of the double track which. seems to me 1 1 desirable to eliminate delays and to obtain as a result [jun service of greater rapidity. This re- . J coinendation has been approved. We are- 1 ■ are now arranging for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars, 'i and we have filed with the Commission ■ i (Continued on page S,)
"We are now in the process of purchasing 10 new passenger cars, 'i and have filed with the Commission for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars, 'i and have filed with the Commission for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars, 'i and have filed with the Commission for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars, 'i and have filed with the Commission for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars, 'i and have filed with the Commission for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars, 'i and have filed with the Commission for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars, 'i and have filed with the Commission for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars, 'i and have filed with the Commission for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars, 'i and have filed with the Commission for the purchase of 10 new passenger cars.
Solve today this problem that has been troubling you for several weeks and install an "AQÜA" water heater. Ask for a practical demonstration at the A. Ribot & Go-, or in our offices and you will be convinced that we have solved the problem of boiling water, so important in these times- > We guarantee boiling water in less than a minute. > We guarantee you boiling water in less than one minute.
tél, restaurant, soda fountain, dairy, laundry, and barber shop should install an "Aqua" water heater without delay. Do your research, we assure you that it is worth your time and your money. A. R1BOT & CO. E. GRIFFO, PONCE. F. FERNANDEZ Y CO., Humácao. P. INDART, Guayama. II
A coalition between Americans and Filipinos t -.
Puerto Ricans should not embark for now.
Our distinguished compatriot Don Jose Cruzado sends us from New York, the following letter, in which he highlights the serious crisis that has arisen there: "With respect to my previous letter concerning the present situation in New York, I must tell you that here the crisis is acquiring more alarming proportions every day, for yesterday I read in the "N-Y. Herald", a news item about the crisis. Herald", a terrifying news. This paper said that all the woolen manufacturing houses would be closed today, and that, therefore, about one hundred and thirty thousand men would be out of work. This, together with the great number of factories closing every day, will produce panic in the city. The worst of all this is that this great crisis is taking place in the middle of winter, with the result that not only is an individual exposed to suffer the horrors of hunger, but he is also exposed to have to endure the rigors of the cold, and to have to endure the rigors of the cold. W THE -CONCERT OF DALMAU For tomorrow night's concert, there will be a lot of excitement. We can assure you that aristocrats and numerous families of San Juan and Santurce will fill the theater of the pia za de Colón. The distinguished violinist Dalmau, who won an indescribable triumph in Mayaguez on Thursday, will be the object of an extraordinary tribute, prepared for him by the most distinguished elements of our society. Theater "America" ALWAYS SOMETHING NEW to offer. DEBUT- TONIGHT -DEBUT OF THE FAMOUS DUET LES TRIANON LOS REYES DE LA RISA AND PREMIERE in Puerto Rico of the drama El Corazón de una Joven By Bárbara Caetteton TWO SHOWS: -7:15 and 9 o'clock. PRICES: -Lunettes, 0.40 -Children, 0.25 Amphitheater-0.50 Nifios-0.35 -Palcos $4. Tomorrow SUNDAY:-New Program -LES ' TRIANON" In the Afternoon:- MATINEE by LES TRIANON Prices Matinée:-Lunettes over .25 Children $0.15 MATINAL at 10:30 with the Movie of the Night. Las Redes del Amor Premiere in Puerto Rico PINTURAS i VILLAMIL I ¿ 3 See our ad 3 on page 3 second page. 3
t ■ (ENGLISH CABLE) ■ - MANILA.-Four Americans and seven Filipinos were killed as a result of a collision between Filipino and military constabularies ñor teamericanos. WASHINGTON.-The Georgetown observatory recorded horrible earthquakes to the east and west, which lasted from seven o'clock in the morning until noon. Half the Atlantic opened up and a huge mountain arose, producing gigantic and infernal waves re mills _ GENEVA, December 17.-The "League of Nations'' admitted Bulgaria, Luxemburg and Costa Rica as members. MEJICO.-The burial of the Secretary of War I, Benjamin Hill, was impressive. NEW ORLEANS: Horrible fire destroyed two steamers; four almost destroyed; Jahncke's dry dock damaged. Losses amount to many millions. The incident was caused by the breaking of an electric cable, which fell into an oil tank. PARIS. -The Minister of War, Mr. Lefevre, has resigned. MARION (Ohio) - Hording and CooJidge confer on the forthcoming formation of the Cabinet and the association of nations BARCELONA - The city has regained its normal appearance. Strikers return to the factories. TODAY- -Strike in Puerto Rico. -TODAY pi" mo in Paramount's drama in 6 acts, Love Crime CURRENT PRICES NOTE: Would you recommend this tape to our Favorecedores33 We have over dock Ce- 1 2 3 3 mentó Portland ' S H "ALSEN" | ¡3 Corru- o 3 3 3 gado "APOLLO" galvanized iron. 3 3 3 3 3 3 galvanized barbed wire. 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Paris pun_ 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3. 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3!  3 > Stubbe Bros.Inc. 3 3 3 Tanca 9. 3b ; San Juah, P. R. x wi ■ --- ■ i.- 1 1 1 Button plating and lining. To CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt. 1 Give him a bicycle or motorcycle. See PANZARDI, Alien 71.
To owners of buses and trucks We have just released "Miller' Cord tires in sizes 36 x 6 and 40 x 8, flat slice type, for buses and trucks, which we recommend as the best for such vehicles. . We also stock "Miller" Cord tires* and tubes in all sizes for automobiles and motorcycles. Ask ABOY, VIDAL & CO., INC. for price lists and discounts. E*f "oWU.ER. fe* 1 ":!) San Juan, P. R. k. _ =======3 ^ == =-
Exclusive Agents for. Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo, and Virgin Islands H UNION COMMERCIAL CORPORATION, | I H Machinery Department, San JUfcn, P. R. B
~T ~ OPENING TODAY, SATURDAY, THE 18th OF THE CURRENT r o T"_ Fraternally greets the Pharmacists of all the Island and offers its 1 he a haimaceUtlCai L>ompany OI 1 ono IXICO, me., . gj-mJes wholesale stock in its warehouses in Ponce de Leon Avenue QUIMICOS MANUFACTUREROS. ' 75-79, esq. a la Calle de Cena, Parada 15, Santurce, at prices without possible competition for having direct representations of the best manufacturing houses and biological laboratories of Europe and the United States. - : : : : : : . Call Tel. 491 Santurce, for our service. -Absolute guarantee -Careful attention -We invite you to visit us.
Passengers will not be allowed to take li-' l cor on the high seas.
According to a recent opiI nion of the Washington Department of . Prohibition, Washington, no steamer may sell liquor on the high seas, as this is in conflict with the provisions of the Volstead Act. According to this opinion, American-registered vessels are forced to abandon the established custom of selling intoxicating beverages on the high seas and in foreign waters. Since the authorities are unable to exercise surveillance over the crews of ships, orders have been issued to the United States Consuls* in all countries of the world to report any violation of the law, for which the captain of the ship alone will be held responsible. THE CITY OF WORK OFFERS AN INTERESTING ASPECT TO THE. WORKERS' CITY The workers' constructions in Mar tin Peña continue with extraordinary speed, and already the neighborhood offers the appearance of a carefully built city, with its cross streets and picturesque avenues. Hundreds of factories have already settled there, and very soon, according to our reports, the construction of a large theater for cinematograph shows will begin. . The interior commissioner has taken a great interest in the construction of the new district, and he is personally hastening the work. The entire right side of the grounds of the old camp "Lis Casas" is already occupied by numerous shelters, and it is estimated that by the end of this month, all the buildings will be completed. The poor families who resided in the Fairgrounds have already moved to the new neighborhood. Notice to the public The new price list containing all the prices of the "Eont" grocery supplies is in circulation; and we are mailing it to our numerous customers. If any of them do not receive it, please ask for it so that we can send it to them at once. The said Listín is the best guide for those who want to buy at this Colmado. DE FONT Y HERMANOS Tanca No. 6 esq. Fortaleza San Juan, P. R. - Advt. SPANISH CHESTNUTS OFFERS SOBRINOS DE IZQUIERDO ' " Y CO. _ San Juan, P. R.
"England should withdraw all her troops from Ireland."
FRENCH CABLE WASHINGTON. - In Congress ! a resolution was introduced by Mr. Burke, representative for the Republican party of Pennsylvania, that-England should at once withdraw the troops it has in Ireland, and that the American government should recognize the one established by the majority of the inhabitants of the Island. This project has produced great jubilation among the Irish residing in the United States. It is not known whether it will pass; but it is known that the cause of Ireland has numerous sympathizers in the Congress of the United States. BERN. - Edmund Schulthess has been elected President of Switzerland THE GENERAL STRIKE OF THE WORKERS DEPENDS ON TOMORROW'S MEETING As we announced yesterday, tomorrow will be held in the halls of the "Free Federation" the announced meeting of the Board of Directors of that body, called for the purpose of dealing with important matters connected with the workers and with the general strike of the workers, which, on account of the low sugar, has been announced for the last day*). We have reports that several members of the ' ' Free Federation ' ' hold the opinion that a strike should be called at once, in view of the fact that the Centrale; insist on lowering the' ' wages of the workers. In this same opinion abound the heads of the organized federations of the country. At the meeting which is announced for niegan* will be attended by representations do the island. ■-V J? UNIVERSAL presents tomorrow, Sunday, at the "RIALTO" the colossal Robertson Cole drama in six acts "THE MILLIONAIRE VAGABUNDO" by the popular J. Warren Kerrigan CURRENT PRICES. 1000 Palm Beach and Casimir suits in all sizes. | J. Rivera Perez | § Allen 5S - Box 1397 S g San Juan, P. R. g