EL MONDO
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. 0. Box 345
8 paginM 3 ctvs. I Semester, $4-00 I One year. $.7.50 I
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR II
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO ¡
"mo avinmuM M""r *"wu. i**, ova; mimuW m ta. SM ti Mtubar S, leí?, u SU at the Poet Ofln of ten Jew. Port" titee. B" "Odor ti tbe P-id-a a. a Bari-na. PeotirttimOeeerel
umu-m ee "Mvna nm . "ne. 11. ni", I rt toe Pee* Oteo. -" 1*1 y". Duck BIm, (üilUÍ L ñtti- ti a-riee) f*4 "r a* Art ti -iti S, 1STS I
|SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 1920
J NUMBER 543
Turks ask Armenia for a "Soviet" government Greece asks Constantine to return to the throne.
- SILK SHIRTS - half price. ( from 12 to $6.00 "" I from 10 to $5.00 ys i from 4 to $2.50 ! from 3 to $1.89 ( from 2 to $1.34 Cute colors and in all sizes.
SPECIAL - BATHROOM BATHS - thick plush. Bit" I heard Bail i from 12 to $ 9 00 ( from 10 to $ 7.00 ! also others at my low prices. 1 Gonzalez bun Co., Inc. : Departaami" de Caballero....
No more expensive prices!!!!
j _ PAJAMAS FINAS - s at half price. 1^ f from 6 to $4.00 g I from 5 to $3.00 -S" j from 3.50 to $2.25 °" ( from 3 to $1.75. We also have Reis T-shirts from $1.25 to 75 c. French T-shirts from $3.00 to $1.19.
TALKING TO GBAN CUPLETISTA CONSUELO MAYEND1A
A*eaa* sounded the horn of the steamer "Caneas** * expected from Venezuela, sao peraené in the motile, líe attracted an ode idea. I was dragged by a single pensa. atiento.. I wanted to ▼" before any other mortal of the island saw her, the nice and celebrated artist Consuelo Maydía, who was arriving on the boat. -She comes alone," I had been asked or* the waiting place, "No, gentlemen. She is accompanied by her thick, Don Cristobal Sanchez del Pino. He is an actor of great renown, who knows how to croak the roles he plays. As for Consuelo, she is a miracle of grace. For me, the artist must be a tiny woman, harmonious and vivacious like the soul of a castanet. That's how you saw her through the chronicles I read about her... ... .... ... I was not wrong. La Mayen day te una MUJERCITA.... Little... Oractoea ... Restless, like a bundle of nerves. As soon as the steamer docked, I saw her appear on the ladder, agile and light... She looked like a little bird, about to take flight. She descended. Her husband was following her, - Be careful, Consuelo, don't step on the wrong foot, - he warned her! The seder Fons, her employer, who was slií. m® introduced: -Can ground, a journalist..... -AM*. feet of you, Mrs.. Mo introduced her husband. Fobs hm invites you to walk. ... -Where to?" she asks..... . . . - ' - - Mtetrta tamiwof bada ti hotel -In which theater are you going to debut? -At ti "America'*. Are you very foolish? -From here? -... Well, look at it .... The front is on the other side. As a theater, it's the best thing to find you in San Juan. -I'm glad," he exclaimed with satisfaction. -The joy is greater for me, because you have arrived in Puerto Rico. Because, you should know, Consuelo, that you were awaited with great impatience. War"... the dock with its muffled murmur was leaving behind... In front, the first artery of the "enchanted doubt" was opening its asphalt width. -When do you make your debut? -I asked. 8a "to "catch him I took the word: -The martas.... Due to a certain cession that we have made in the theater, the "debut" cannot be tomorrow, as I thought.
i -Better for Consuelo. It's better for Consuelo, isn't it? -I don't care," she said, smiling. -Let's open up, Consuelo; tell us about your artistic career. Where did you swim? I'm Spanish... I was born in... -At what age did you start working? -At the age of sixteen. -Where did you make your debut? -In Valencia. Before the year was over, I performed in Madrid, -With a lot of success? -The artist enjoys remembering: -Oh, yes, I believe it! Forgive my immodesty. You are not talking about Consuelo. You are talking about the artist. -... The public in Madrid gave me a standing ovation and the press showered me with praise. That is to say, the press showered me with praise. -But, how? to whom? I murmured in surprise. -To whom? -To "the artist", man!... To 'the artist'! .... And Consuelo laughed heartily, she had caught me in my own nets! .... -And of Caracas, where you come from, what do you say? -The memory of this city will always be attached to my soul. It was there that I changed gender. I left the vo devil and the género chico, to become a cupletista -And what influenced you to make that decision? -Oh, for a long time people had been telling me to dedicate myself to the cuplé. In Barcelona, Mexico, Caracas, Havana, everyone advised me to do the same thing. One day, Pastora Imperio, after having heard me sing "La mala (Continued on page 3.) About the octal situation in Venezuela On Friday night we talked to a young Venezuelan who landed in San Juan on his way to New York, who told us about the situation in Venezuela. -After the revolution-initiated by Peñalosa, the situation in Venezuela is unbearable. There it is enough that the presence of an individual is not "pleasing" to the Venezuelan police for one to go to give with his humanity to the ''Rotunda", -Have you been there? (Continued on page 8).
The current price of sugar will provoke an unsustainable situation on the island.
All the sugar mills will sink into bankruptcy, and the workers' wages will go down in accordance with the price of sugar.
The price of sugar continues to fall in a remarkable way. The latest cablegrams received yesterday say that the price of the rich grain has reached $6.03, which is considered fatal and serious for the countries, like Puerto Rico, which live and sustain themselves on this market. Naturally, the news causes deep pessimism among the country's sugar growers and even in the country itself, which sees its fertile and rich industry in danger. We have asked the opinion of some centralists of San Juan about this matter, and two of them, Mr. Rafael Balseiro and Mr. Damián Monserrat, have expressed themselves in terms that point to a patent disorganization in the sugar market and mainly in what concerns and will harm our island. According to Mr. Damián Monserrat, president of the Central Vanilina, the drop in sugar prices is mainly and above all due to the Government's determination to lower the price of consumer products. Another reason, which should be considered in second place, is the attitude of England, France, Italy, Chile, etc., countries where the depreciation of the currency is quite accentuated and well below the American currency. These nations - continues Mr. Monserrat - which have a certain amount of sugar, send it to the United States, taking it away from their own consumption, in the hope that by selling it in North America, they will acquire excellent prices, given the rise of the American currency. DO THAT HURTS P. R,--On the other hand in Puerto Rico--adds you Mr. Monserrat--where we pay for everything that is consumed in gold, the price is disastrous, because it does not cover, not even with CINEMA LUNA Today-THE STAR NORMAL SUCH. MADGE in the thrilling Drama TRAS BASTIDORES" Customary Prices Wanted' a wet nurse who is in healthy condition. Good references. Bnen sueldo Report: Carretera No. 56, Parada 12%, Santurce. Phone 154. Button plating and lining. A CARAZO, Bran St 72. Advt. -toa. Old Bronze For Purchase:-Will inform Purchasing Dept. AM. RR. oo, of Porto Rice Advt.
much, the expense of production If we add to all this the great propaganda being made for the less consumption of the sweet and the bad intelligence that exists 1 between the United States refiners and the producers of Cuba, we would find. There are also other reasons for the fall in sugar prices. The central banks cannot sub SISTER, WITH THOSE PRICES AND THE COUNTRY SUFFERS THE CONSEQUENCES. -It is impossible that with these prices the sugar mills of the country can be sustained, unless-he added-there comes a readjustment, by which materials, wages, salaries and contributions are lowered. The growers cannot continue to pay the price of the Cuban Empréstito Yesterday the following cablegram was received in San Juan: "2500 sacks of sugar have been sold from Puerto Rico at $6.25 afloat. Cuba sugar bids at $5.25 with no buyers Slack market. Cuba's borrowing looks like it will fail." Theater "America" DEBUT- TODAY SATURDAY -TODAY From the Varieties Company "LOS MONGES" Songs, Dances, Pumps, Dialogues Jugglers, Acrobats Balancers and the Movie Happiness of Three Women Popular Prices:-MONDAY 35 cts Afternoon: Matinee-Two Tandas. Tomorrow SUNDAY.Last Show in the Varieties "LOS MONGES" With a Select New Program. And the detective film "The Teeth" by T^gre Popular Prices: Lunettes 35 cts In the Morning: "MATINAL" with the Movie of the evening and in the afternoon SPECIAL MATINES dedicated to the Children, by "LOS, MONGES", at three o'clock in the afternoon. Senior Lunettes: 25 Cts. Children 15. Only the "AMERICA" can offer such an inexpensive show to the public. Ask a lady of good taste or / . C. Warm & te, S. a C. TETUAM W * SANJUAN >PTO. BUCO
ging the present salaries, since at the present price of sugar, it is impossible to buy fertilizer, farming implements and the rest of the ma. terials. i MR. MONSERRAT FORESASTS, HOWEVER, A SATISFACTORY SOLUTION - I trust," he added, "that for the convenience of everyone, interests will be harmonized to balance, equally, production and consumption, in order to find a solution satisfactory to all interests. MR. BALSEIRO'S OPINION. Our dear friend Don Rafael Balseiro, made yesterday to an editor of EL MUNDO the following interesting statements. THE COMMERCIAL COMBINATION OF THE TRUSTS HAS BROUGHT ABOUT THIS SITUATION. For Mr. Balseiro, the sugar trusts are the main culprits of the situation. The world cannot produce enough sugar for consumption," says Mr. Balseiro, "and therefore there is no justifiable reason why the present prices should be maintained. THE BLOW TO THE CENTRALS With these prices it is impossible for the sugar mills to sustain themselves, unless the wages of the workers are lowered. But the planters will have no choice but to lower those wages, which were raised, as is well known, on the basis of the $15 and $20 prices which sugar reached at the time of the war. IMPERIAL CINEMA TODAY- SATURDAY-TODAY NAZIMOVA At THE RED LIGHT Amphitheater, 30 cts. Lunettes, 25 ce is NEEDED TRIPLERS There are two vacancies with good pay in a Sugar Central near San Juan Contract for six months. No apprentices wanted. Box 496, San Juan Puerto Rico. AGUSTIN M. DE ANDINO Gates s "Uk for trucks We advise all truck owners that we now have in stock solid truck tires, "UNITED STATES" brand. Our solid tires are supplied PRESSURED and DISMOUNTABLE and also "NOBRY CORD" non-automatic tires for trudm. piKTRArroin a sojo * (Rubber Dept.) ' i , San Juan. ,
DANTZIG WILL BE UNDER THE MILITARY "CONTROL" OF POLAND.
FRENCH CABLE i I I i CONSTANTINOPLA. - The Turkish nationalists have demanded that the Armenians set up a "soviet" government under Turkish protectorate. The nationalists say that this will be the only way to avoid the very serious situation Armenia is going through. The former king has told a representative of the "Associated Front" his opinion about the elections in Greece. The ex-king said that ¡ | he could not allow his name to appear in the party that called for a referendum for him to return, and that if the people called for it, he would go immediately unless he was forced to do so. The Argentine delegate Pueyrredon declared the necessity of democratizing the League by preparing for the admission of the United States into that body. He asked that ' the members of the Council should be by the -, i Assembly, instead of by the great I I I des Powers. ' . NEW YORK-General Nivelle I delivered a speech at Milwakee, । Wisconsin, in which he made the following. j tey statements: 'The best Uga of í nations is the friendship which should exist- 1 tir between the two great Republics of Europe and America In France wish san many of your children, which । them will not be able, to be forgotten.'The Ge. General spoke in an optimistic manner One dead and several wounded in Ponce I I I Ponce, November 19. Mr. Director of EL MUNDO, San Juan. José María Milán died in hospital "Tricoche" as a result of a bullet received from Santos Bartolomey, i Consequence collapse scaffolding Catholic temple, where they worked several workers left, bruised 3. and one seriously Speech that appears English section newspaper "El Tienen" pronounced young Arjona in Guánica, has produced bad impression here. Manuel Mócete Padilla, ii
i and made known the bright future of France and the complete restoration that awaits her. ATHENS, November 19, -Demonstrations continue in, favor of ray Costantino. Thousands of people reco_ train night and day the streets of the city calling for the return to the throne of the ex- ; sovereign, who, according to reports, is preparing to leave Switzerland for this ca_ । pitaL , "Le Matin" of Paris says that 'France and England will not admit, in 1 any way, the return of de Constan I tino, despite the wishes of a certain majority of the Greek people, I nes of pesetas, i ATHENS. -The people desire the regie so to the throne of ex.king Constantine. WASHINGTON-Moments before the opening of today's session of the League of Nations, President. M. Hymans, addressed an expressive Legram to President Wilson, in which he expressed the sympathies of the League for the illustrious statesman and wished him well. The President replied, thanking him and expressing his personal wishes that the work of the Society "* will be of great benefit to mankind. ATHENS. -M. Rhallys, charged with forming Government, has appointed the 'following persons to constitute the Cabinet: i Foreign Affairs and Justice, Rhal lys; War, Gounaris; Finance, Ca. llegero; Navy, Rhaledys; Interior Thal deris, and Instruction, Zaimis. GENEVA. -The Council of the League of Nations has decided, in principle, to entrust Poland to the mandate of the military defenses of Dantzig. WASHINGTON-A communication issued today by the State Department says that the Government threatens the "Western | Union ' ' telegraph Company with revocation of authorization pa Ira to possess cables in the United States, if the said Company does not decide to grant to the Government the same privileges it gives * foreign Governments in the transmission of cable dispatches -It is announced that the reserve of the National Banks of the United States 'two reaches $21,000,000,000.
dis . li proi Wis m nac
TO TRADERS IN SHOES' We are at present in a position to be able to give very good prices on canvas shoes with rubber soles (KEDS), of the famous brands CHAMPION, SISTER SUE PUMP, LEDA PUMP, LOTOS PUMP and others. PIETRANTONI & SOJO Footwear Department . BAN JUAN, P. R.
BILLARES We offer PAÑOS and all kinds of accessories for them at unbeatable prices. P. L. Cormier Comp. Cristo 16? - P.O. Box 634 SAN JUAN
The exploits of the ESSEX give it a conspicuous place among all motor cars. The ESSEX holds the speed record for an endurance trip between New York and San Francisco. It made the crossing in 4 days, 14 hours - and 43 minutes-in less time than the fastest express. The ESSEX has STRENGTH and STABILITY. It is a strong and consistent car. But in addition to these advantages, the ESSEX has an elegant cut and is extremely comfortable. It is a cart of which its owner is always proud. noun mm kales if mw wo SANJUAN.
fe í
300000
IMPORTANT NOTICE We are receiving a large shipment of: Twisted Rods of all sizes. Corrugated and Plain Galvanized Iron, 'which we will sell on dock at SPECIAL PRICES Inquire at the FERRETERIA MERINO SAN JUAN.
€