THE MONDO
6 pítlnta 3 ctvt. -nmnntre, H4N Unate, 67.
| MvWcr Btml. VI I TaL t" P. O. D "k 9U
- MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
ARO U
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Act óf oetotaé e, 101T, "a"- at ü>" Poet Offiea at Baa Joaa, Pa* 1 Sien Bt order of the PreaídMit. A. < Berleaon, Pataata i
iLnrerea a a a cecone rita" multar, f - b r a a r y 31. lili, ■ ■ at the Poa* Offiea at Baa Jasa. Porta Biea, (U a ita4 1 ¡ Statoa of Amtaiea) andar tha Aet ' of -reb S. 1S7V 1
SATURDAY, JULY 3, IW.
NUMBER 426.
du sueeso imca- !"- occurred fen la I WO AracNmL
Atfeprfat>A> Jo that I told teL MUNDO ¡ -a - My telegram yesterday, I can aña. ' say the following: ¡ i Ctyk" a Iga three-thirty in the afternoon, ¡ the freight train ran over Ramón ¡ Rodríguez Cardona, popularly known as "Moncho Mayaguezano' Despite, the investigations practictitadas per the police; and the pes- 1 quisas performed by us, we have not reached a positive conclusion, about the origins of the unfortunate sucoso. When we arrived at the site of the incident, we witnessed an impressive scene. It appeared J : eí'Jnfolie Rodriguez, under the train ÓM^aanbas p^ernás; crushed and with nunwrpsas contusienes in the body, Opportunely arrived the authorities- 1 d& Integradái by the diligent chief Mr. ' Éd^ieirde Aim and the prosecutor Mr, Palmer, 1 e" afilón of the photographer Mr. Borges, who 1 temó two views of the fact. Rodriguez died minutes later. 1 The employees of] the railroad said- * raron before the authorities and all are- ' tiated that the event resulted. 1 The victim was a shoemaker. 1 The victim was a shoemaker by trade, quite young and was employed at - the " Missiríppii ' 1 THE CORRESPONDENT. ' < CRASH OF AN ELECTRIC CAR WITH A CAR < 1 Yesterday electric car number 34 < collided with the faithful automobile Dr. Rios, do Naguabo, < In the car were traveling the said! j doctor; Juan Mendez, justice of the peace; 1 Francisco Cordero, Commissioner of the ■grvlelo Público, and Ledo. Rodríguez ! Dtflüü, all from Naguabo. 1 Be the investigation practiced was i itMfiMpdaalgups^nagligencík by MFJhzlín lata. < .idMacMu- to 1* agility of Dr. Rios, i ■n we have to note some misfortune. 1 . 1 Mi il sewerage WlM Wriidt obrera' Ei cmitmlo ptira the sewerage ] die the barriada obrera in Santurce, 1 has been awarded to Don Felix Benitor Rcx "eh "for the sum of 123,373130. 5 The aforesaid contractor has begun to order the necessary material, and ¡ already has all the technical personnel pre < stopped,. in order to begin such < important work with the greatest possible bre- i -Pódad- 1 rí-- .. ii । ™ CURTED SOLE ; ' OAK , . V4> 3 -"' r - í DBENH^ÁABuÍnALOS ZADE SAN JUAlt Y DE LA ISLA . Another new shipment of SUELA have just been received by the SEES . PIZA HEBmAnos. in this rMsesa have arrived three new ti.pw in clean Bands weighing only do* to 10 Ubrai per band, A" - Tanning. Superior. . This sole is manufactured under the BORLE process, which guarantees a longer life than the old maagl* procedures, besides being loose, it always retains a bad smell when worn. . There are up to twelve different types for PlantdfcJMttñinelaft, PlantitnaB, Coadra- . taÉrtqe and paos, vira and- Heel from *87 quintal onwards. YamMéa-M has redbidb another assortment í* PDKLEB of all kinds at MB'OompdtyBcia prices. Advt. W " 1 ■■ " " " ■ ■ "■ -
Theater Cine ¡mperial^HOY ■ fl IfM- in - -S T Xo" first" in Santurce in Exhibiting |u SALOME yran tragic World ^THEDA BARA^r - : Loneta JO AnSteetaolS MátaZO wlltNilÍRMpauamsMMMiaeenmiaaee^mn.
Great festivities to reciMr to the battleship Alfonso XIII:
Some people have shown surprise of x that the battleship "Alfonso xm" has arrived in Havana, having left Cadiz on the 10th of last month. The reason is very simple. The "Alfonso XIII" will not make the voyage but at an economical rate since there is no hurry. Since the ship is preparing to carry out a mission of rapprochement between Spain and the Hispanic nations of America, there is no hurry, therefore, since the itinerary of the modern battleship will be prolonged almost indefinitely. In Havana, celebrations in honor of the ■ crew members of the Spanish ship have begun to take place. The president of the Spanish Center, Narciso Ma cia, summoned distinguished Spanish and Cuban personalities, including the Spanish Representative, in order to agree on the preliminaries of the festivities. At the meeting an account was given of the offer made by the "Asociación de' Chauffeurs", who put their machines at the disposal of the Committee to dedicate them to take the sailors of the battleship on a tour of the city. * On behalf of the "Diario de la Marina", Mr. Gil del Real stated its intention to offer a banquet in its premises in honor of the officers. The Declamation section of the "Fomento Ca. talá" was offered to take part in a performance in honor of the sailors. The President of the Executive Committee of the company "La Tropical" put the gardens of the same at the disposal of the sailors to whom he will give a lunch. A collection was made among the merchants of the city, the amount of which was placed at the disposal of the Committee. To reeiWF the battleship, a sufficient number of tugboats will be chartered, one of these for the journalists. A request has been made to the trade to stop work on the day of the arrival of the battleship for the duration of the voyage. A request has been made to the trade to interrupt their work for two hours, so that as many people as possible may take part in the reception. A champagne of honor will be held in the halls of the "Dependent's Association", and will be organized by its board of directors. The gala ball will be held at the. 4 'Casino Español", being its organization in charge of the Recreation Section. An excursion to Matanzas will also be organized. Mr. Candido Obeso was commissioned to purchase cigars and cigarettes, which in large numbers will be given to the officers and the crew. The program agreed upon has been made on the basis of the ship remaining only four days in the bay, and it is intended to request a longer stay from the government in Madrid, through the Minister. ON VACATION The well-known detective of this city, Don Francisco Barrantes, has begun to enjoy two months' leave. Mr. Barrantes intends to embark next week for the neighboring republic of Santo Domingo, in order to rest several days from his hard work in the position he occupies in the detective. NOTICE The public and in particular the Veterans of the Great War are invited to the exercises to be held on Sunday, July 4, at 10 A. M., in the "Muñoz" Park. M., at the "Muñoz Rivera" Park (Fairgrounds) where a monument will be erected in memory of those who perished in the Great War and who left Puerto Rico to enlist in the American and Allied armies. Executive Committee of the Festivities of the 4th of July 1920,
The Polish army was overwhelmed by the "Bolsheviks".
(Cables received yesterday) AMSTERDAM- The army of Poland, led by General Pilsudski, : has been overwhelmed with such impetus by the "bolshevikis," that co- ¡ pe or horrible havoc is expected in its ranks. LONDON, July'2. -It is assured that Krassine, representative of the Russian "Bolshevikis" intends to confer with the Aieman Government,' on leaving England for Retrograd. CONSTANTINOPLA.-According to reports received here the Turks have can- 1 . sated a heavy defeat to the Greeks ■ on the Smyrna front. The aforementioned reports have not yet been officially con-1 signed, ¡ WASHINGTON-Mr, Samuel Gou- । pers, president of the ' 'American Fe-' deration of Labor," announces that the Go. biennium has promised him to take energetic measures to protect tenants against the ignoble usury of landlords. General March, Chief of Staff of the American Army in France, has conferred with Marshals Foch and Joffre to see how the United States Army occupying the German Rhine should take part in the magnificent festivities which are being prepared for the 14th of July. BRUSSELS-Some of the members who are to meet at the Spa Conference, scheduled for the 10th, have arrived. The German delegates advise that they will be here next Wednesday PARIS,-It is more than probable that Don-Alfonso XIII and the English monarch will be here during the festivities of the "14th of July," which are expected to be grandiose, as all the warlords of the war will parade through the streets, pracediend* to* the Mayer State, WASHINGTON.-The Government will investigate the truth of the version which assures us that the bandit of the war, the bandit of the war, was a bandit. The Government will investigate whether there is any truth in the story that the bandit Pancho Villa shot 300 women in the vicinity of Parral two weeks ago, a fact which has caused extraordinary indignation in the Reprblic. MADRID - King Alfonso XIII will go on the 11th to the province of Santander, to spend the summer at the Magdalena Palace. It is probable that the Ministers and the diplomatic corps will spend the summer season in the vicinity of the royal mansion. IN SAN JUAN The Commissioners of Carolina, Messrs. Hernandez, Bird and Oliveros, have been in San Juan on political and administrative matters of the said town. The plans for the 1 Hospital, Market Square and Casa AynnMnñento have been approved After these works, the Aqueduct will be put up for auction. DON JOSE teENTTEZ GAUTIER Our friend Don José Benitez GAUTIER has returned from the United States to spend his vacation here. Our friend Don José Benítez Gautiér, son of the Deputy Commissioner of the Interior, the excellent gentleman Don Jesús Benítez Castaño, has returned from the United States to spend his vacation here. The talented young man has just finished his third year of civil engineering at Cornell University in New York. DENTISTS! PRACTITIONERS! We cordially invite you to pay us a visit- Our office, our employees and our services are at your disposal!!! r WE ALWAYS HAVE SOMETHING INTEÍ RESANTE FOR THE PROFESSION. . i ; ■ BELENDEZ & GARCIA -Alien 62- / Representatives of ¡ 'FRANK & BETZ CO. Advt
jp]
The unbiased pretsa chipie perfectly its mission.
A FALL OF -EL TIEMPO" "El Tiempo^ in yesterday's edition, referring to Bertas po lyrical information that appeals to the impar I cial press-of which EL MUN DO is a part-advises the Republicans not to give credence to pa kind of information because it precedes from anic nist sources. And the colleague adds: "As a reminder, remember that EL : MUNDO published a letter whose pater. The fact is that, on the return of this good friend of ours, we have been able to verify what we assumed when we read that letter in EL MWDO, that is, that it was a crude piece of dishonesty as plfctame^te f Mil. Mr. Toa* did not write such a letter and could not have done so, for he was not in Washington and, consequently, could not have visited Mr. Córdová Dávila and not seen Governor Yapér. and, consequently, could not have had any conversation with him as pretended in that false letter. If only we could always so easily expose all the mentions of the uaflnists, who have proposed to make the present campaign a campaign * of deceit and falsehood," To these lines we have only to reply to 'Ríl Tiempo" with very few words, but so clear and categorical, that they will surely cause the colleague surprise and displeasure. The letter, cnjntpaternity is attributed to Mr. Robert H. Todd, and qne 'ElTiempo" califtcaíde apocryphal not e-, the work of a Unionist Ano of a Republican - of a Republican" enthusiastic, cultured and intellectual. Lump, if the letter is a crude superciliousness, completely false, as the colleague says, that superh "i i i i is not the work of BL*MUNDO but of! coir picuo correligionario of "El Tiempo". It is to him, then, that the colleague must turn on this occasion so unfortunate for him. Having written the above lines, we received from Mr. Roberto H. Todd the following letter: July 2, 1920 Mr. Director of EL MUNDO, San Juan, P.R. On my return yesterday from the United States, a friend showed me an issue of your important newspaper dated June 10, 1920, in which appears on the front page, third column, an "Important letter from Mayor Roberto K. Todd". Todd". I have read that important letter, which your "In^arcial Report" says was written by me, and I have to tell you, Mr. Director, that this letter is totally apocryphal. He has not written from the United States any political letters other than those which I have addressed to "1 President of my party, Mr. Tons Soto, and in none of them have I been able to make the statements which appear in the letter which you publish. I have not been to Washington, and, consequently, I have not visited Mr. Córdova Dávila. I have not seen Gober, nador Yager and, therefore, have not been able to have any conversation with him at all. In view of these facts, hope you will be good enough to publish in your important daily this caita of mine so that things may be in their true Ingzr From you kindly, R. H. TODD. FOR SANTO DOMINGO On the "Marina", which leaves today for the ports of the neighboring Republic, eo> boat the detective Barrantes, terror of all the crooks who roam in San Juan, . .Private matters take him to the Primate rimiad, in which we hope he will receive pleasant impressions, given the special gifts that distinguish the frankness of his character. Happy travels.
CH I MII OTHER API g ANTITUBERCULeUSE
ACTIOXYNE - r . 2. :o ■ : C ~
I Hliúnpoules: - Z ~ Z ~ Z J P: de 5" , I * de3.5 etlÓ^ , I F youy injections intoaveheuses [ pour instillabófe Peebles |
r , - 2 - = = : : a - - > - - ; - f r 0 i * A *- 3 £ : S ; u L 0 I i.'SINTS C'ü'W'OUE? - j I
Gov. Proclamation for new days i of enrollment.
The Governor has issued the following proclamation: "The Insular Board of Elections, in session held on the 30th day of June last, has fixed the dates of July 7. Ti S and ? d? 1920 as additional registration days in all precincts and electors of Puerto Rico, for the purpose of issuing registration certificates for petitions which have been duly filed on or before the 30th day of June 1920 and for which no registration certificates have been given. which the corresponding certificates have not been issued, and for the purpose of correcting errors in the registration certificates, except in the precincts of Cuiehra. Bayamón. Mo "i ea. First and second seals of -1 Ponee. First and Second Precincts । of San Juan, and First and Second Precincts of Utuado, for which the following additional registration days have been fixed: "i CULEBRA-July 9. 1920. ' BAYAMON- July 7. 1920. in - Cataño; July ¿ and 9. 1920, in Bayal r n.ón. Mxa -Jul¡<. G. 7, 8. 9, 10, 12, si 1920. PONCE: First Precinct, July 6 and 7. 1920: Second Precinct, July 8 and 9, 1920: SA JUAN: H First Precinct, July G and 7, 1920; ' ' Second Precinct, July 8 and 9. 1920 UTUADO: H First Precinct. July 7, 8 and 9. 4 11.20 '1 Precinto Segurólo. July 7. 8 and 9, ! l>20"-n Utuado. 1 i Lus registrations for these adi > i cional days will be held at the 'í regular registration premises during ¡ the m-registration hours which have sií do proclaimed antertoi lAnte in ea ! The registration certificates for those petitions which have been duly filed with the local boards of canvassers on or before June 1, 1920, and for correcting errors in the certificates of election, shall be observed only for the purpose of issuing certificates of registration for those petitions which have been duly filed with the local boards of canvassers on or before June 1, 1920, and for correcting errors in the certificates of registration for those petitions which have been duly filed on or before June 30 of the year in which an election is to be held. .' an election is held, and, therefore, no registration petition may be received after June 30. - no application for registration may be received in the regist- . I cion "le registration may not be received on the days adi- . ■ cional days expressed in the pre : nor on any day after Iunio thirty. । In the Municipalities of Bayamon. put . San Juan, and Utuado, which have - i nen two sites for registrations ca ■ * "the one. electors who have filed their petitions for registration on or before the 30th day of June, ! 1920. and have not received certificates of registration for them, may 1 i obtain them on any additional day 1 ! of registration fixed for either ■ of the two* sites." "NT "AS" ARRESTED I Police arrested Francisca Ra- . i mirez, Faustina Martinez and Simona Galo, who were amusing themselves on the Malecon by scandalizing those alreáe- . dores. The three. * Despite their peaceful ' protests of serious people, they were de. nunciadaa for disturbing the order. * NEW AUTOMOBILES Three beautiful mem ANDBR1 cars have just arrived in this city. They are the most modern and elegant thing ever made. Equipped with atanx bre wheels, Cord rubbers, bemba flan Bañar the rubbers, ete. and all les details of the been t taste and solidity s They are sold by Eduardo Oseras, in the cas sa of Zalduondo, Mier y Co,, San Justo - 13 and 15. phone 49S. San Juan. P. B Advt.
European products continue to lie- ¡ ng trade.
i It is not only Germany which is beginning to send to Puerto Ri "x> its~ i products It is also England -a which does not want to allow its enemy "le ayer L- i'eve the preponderar.- ; cía And so we see how e. steamer ; Gopwo has brought infinite artieul"-- । of English and German manufacture. Prc "ce "iemv "ie Germany the - brought, on last voyage on Thursday>. j 4 boxes C "n thermometers. 4 boxes of toys, sewing needles, glass balls, sewing needles, of large sizes; paints, patented and oh- . i objects made of glass, with glasses, etc. . i From England, the same ship brought > í the following articles; machetes, cotton and linen knives, horseshoes. I shovels, picks, hoes, leather effects. : ■ vinegar, salt in small boxes, a va- ■ ried assortment of sweets and articles of , thread. All this has been clocaci' in ü. From France, brought 11 boxes of perfumery t-o-tes. THE STRIKERS STILL ON STRIKE Yesterday an assembly was held at Puerta de Tierra by the "Luiña Munas y Co.", of the Navy who, as reported in our yesterday's issue, had gone on strike demanding an increase in wages and protesting against the act which, with respect to one of them, was obstructed by one of the foremen, who was arrested by the company's foremen. i The object of yesterday's meeting was ■ to agree upon a list of conditions. i which will be presented to * the directors of 11* the factory for their consideration, and in which the destemmers will formulate their new demands. i Yesterday the factory of í "Luiñ* Murías y Co. remained out of work, j - YOUNG MAN WHO TRIUMPHS ■ I Among the 1920 graduates of 1* ! Alt* Central School includes our esteemed friend, young José Jiménez 1 Aguayo, very popular among his classmates and friends. We congratulate the distinguished young man, as well as * his parents, our friends Je sús Jiménez Liaño and Teres* Aguayo, for the success obtained by their son IN THE ASSEMBLY OF THE STRIKERS HELD YESTERDAY ONE WAS ARRESTED FOR CONCITING TO MOTIN Yesterday, while an assembly of the strikers was being held at the "Real" Center, in Puerta de Tierra, was arrested the individual Juan M. ^Joro na, who was inciting the assemblers not to allow the goods to be taken out of the uxieDes. in any way, as was being done. Corona, in a fit of exalted bellicosity, said that the strikers had no shame if they continued to allow the goods to be removed from the mutiles. That it was necessary to suspend at all costs that this cargo continue to be lifted, even if it was necessary to fight and moni . all before such arrests. Corona > was arrested by detectives Muñoz and Hailáoek, who were present there, and placed at the disposal of the Public Prosecutor, who ordered his immediate imprisonment, charging him with incitement to riot. During the meeting, the members of the strike committee spoke, and invited those present to another meeting to be held tomorrow. There was only ■ talk of the calm and indifference with j which the strikers were viewing ' : the progress of the present strike, '. for they were not to allow j ' i further lifting of cargo from the I * * > docks. ■ . i Tomorrow Sunday i , There will be shown at the "Victory Garden Cinema Theater" the first day of the famous film i ' ''H IMfitiJi ta Lies" t't ihfa: ;
A Dutch steamer loaded with effect s from Germany.
Yesterday by 1* liego to our port, coming from Hamburg and Aras terdam. the steamer "Juno", of the cas* consignee of "Sncs de Villamil". The "Juno" brought a cargo of , four thousand sacks of potash, from Germany. for* Villamil. and different articles more. of German manufacture, for di versas cusas of commerce of this pobl* cion It also brought a* large canudad of chocolate, candy, mineral water etc. and a large cargo of hardware for 1* Finlay's and other stores The "Juno' as soon as she loads and takes on some passengers, will leave for Santo Domingo and Cuba, for where she carries cargo Yesterday we visited the "Juno", accompanied by Mr. Ticher. of the consignee house, and were splendidly entertained by the captain Mr. H F < Drescher, and the officers Both the Captain, and the rest of the crew are of Dutch onget . But they speak English, so that we could ' understand them admirabJemezne ' Mr. Drescher presented us, moreover, with rich Dutch tobacco, of which they use < The --Juno" left Amsterdam ' 17 days ago. She is a ship that can carry : four thousand tons of ore. On this trip she will carry a few passengers, as she is provided with sufficient comforts for this purpose. On board there are many workers, employed in 1* unloading. The company to which the '' Ja-no" belongs is known all over the world for the quality and goodness of its ships. As to * the departure dti "Juno" : nothing concrete is known. It is likely to leave on Monday, according to what the captain told us. It all depends on the time of unloading and reloading. The Juno", in addition to the cargo. pr". cédante do.Atamantac txaa tembléis flV rran cargo of Dutch cheese and Danish butter, for San Juan and the island. On the occasion of the . Fourth of July holiday The Governor will receive tenet afternoon, at half past four o'clock, at 1* For taleza. his friends and employees dti Government, etc. to ccnmestorate the 'Independence Day of the Um two States." As it is a little late now for* it, the Governor will not make invitations THE HAT OF A PRIEST The police "ie Puerta Je Tierra t?e re in his wder a hat oue in ' e! e bridge ofi water ie fell to a sa J rendóte. 3 RAFAEL ROMEU t offers house* desdh2.0ú0a 15 000 in Santurce and San Juan and so- V i ► ¡are? * installments. - Sa^ciA Ma 1 sc^re X '''' pMAdíníhC t 1 > TeL -126 black- Callé Hipódre- ♦ i" mo. Santuree. Box 100, San X Juan. 12 to 1.30. From 6 to 9. é DOS DIASELE. VACATION AND REST Excansion to THE ISLAND of St. Thomae. If you embark on the steamer -Marina" on Thursday, the 8th of the current at 10 P. you can pa- ; sar resting and admiring the beautiful American island, two days, July 9 and 10 (Friday and Saturday) and i be back home early Sunday dm 11. t If you are interested in this excursion Baine ai telephone GK - SOS " or visit the offices of the i BULL INSULAR UNE INC. DOCK NO. 2. ' r NOTICE ' 1 * > On the occasion of the celebration of the fieefenq dd 4th of July on Monday prietas. í ueilitpda hartaría -'EL F1GABO^j . warns his numerous clientele that nn^ i will open its door * at all day. Advt.1 ÍSe pfisa botoafié"! ACARAZO.Br" St. 7X3 JMtaH