EL MONDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 A afio. $.7.50
z Offices! Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
DAILY. MORNING. laCEPTO LOS DOMINGOS.
ANNUAL II |
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO |
Education and good success in public life
O'Awwzio is willing to i destroy Fiume
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) autiMiirioéd by the Act of oetober 6,1917, on Sie at the Post OfSee of I San Juan. Porto Rico. By order of the President. A. S. Bur leson. Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, I february 21. 1919, at the Post Office at San Joan. Porto jRi co,- United Btates of America under the Act of^narch_J>,_187t I
j JJARIS. -M. Míllerand offered a meal to the Danish sovereigns. i : CITY OF MEJICO, 10.-The Go. bierno of Japan has recognized the Go bierno of General Obregón. WASHINGTON 10.-After an extensive conference held by Mr. Tulio F. Cestero and Mr. Henriquez Carvajal, President of the Dominican Republic, with officials of the Department of State, it is announced that the decree has been drafted. I t is already drafted the decree, by which the Dominicans are granted greater participation in the internal affairs of the Republic. The news has produced intense jubilation among the Dominicans residing in this city and in New York. i PARIS - The authors of the attack against Venizelos are accused of involuntary homicide Clementina Morin in Humacao ' Very soon she will act in the theater of the greatest modern epic, ' , and attractive Mexican artist Clementina Morin, who has been working with flattering success in the theaters of the eastern region of the island, and who has been working with flattering success in the theaters of the island. The eastern region of the island, being very well received by those audiences. Clementina Morin is in her dealings a lady of refined education because all her childhood was spent, in ciase le; yJumna intern, in a famous school, ¡gio of ladies the Republic ¿z- I 'teca; and this condition, together with her elegant por. te and her beauty, make of her a captivating gentlewoman who wins the sympathies of the cultured societies, wherever she acts. The public of Humacao will pleasantly welcome the very nice ar. tista, who will keep a pleasant memory of her stay in the cultured city. ^aun^^BAiGO^ Wallace Reid Wanda. Hawly in the melodrama in 5 acts. "Double Speed" ¡ CURRENT PRICES ¡ - ■■-■■■ - ■■■ ■■■ ■■■ 1 - 1 Se plisa y forran buttons A CARAZO" Brau St 72. . Advt. i 6a "aN^0MsiNblle" We advise ' those. interested that we have . received Oldsmobile chassis for buses, and those -who are going to buy, should do so at once, for-' we have only two left in stock. PIETRANTÍ>NI á SOJO - (Oldsmobile Department) San Jwm, P. R."
PARIS, Dec. 10.-The President of the Council of Ministers, Mr. Leygues, received today the senator of the French Republic. Leygues received to-day the United States Senator Mr. Me Cormicik, member of the Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs of the Senate. The interview revolved around the situation in Syria and Cecilia, and the report of General Gouraud recommending the agreement with the Kemalist-Turks was presented to Mr. Leygues. Leygues also explained the policy of France in the East and expressed the conviction that the solution of this problem is only a matter of days, since the ratification of a new treaty with Turkey is only awaited - WASHINGTON-President Wilson has issued a proclamation appealing to the sentiment of the American people to come to the aid of the Chinese. -The Minister of Guatemala protested the investigation he is conducting concerning the imprisonment of former President Estrada Cabrera. -The investigation of the "Committee of One Hundred" into Irish affairs continues. BRINDISI, December 10.-The Greek political deputies who will accompany Constantine on his return trip to Gracia have arrived here. BUENOS AIRES: The Minister of Mexico, Mr. Jesús Urueta, died. TERESITA M. DE CESTERO The excellent and very distinguished lady has been discharged from the illness she had been suffering. All that is worth and represents, not only in the highest society of Saa Juan, but also in that of the island, hp made fervent votes" for the health of the noble lady, who always has a flower, which spreads the aroma of her noble spirit, to cover up the evils or defects of others. It is with great joy that we are pleased to bring such pleasant news to our readers. COMMANDER MONTESINOS 1 < The bizarre commander don 8. M. i Montesinos, who is one of the most en . tusiastic and enlightened chiefs of the Army, was discharged yesterday from the military Hos. pit, where he was operated on November 6. We are pleased to give such pleasant news, because he is a person of extraordinary worth, very dear to our society, not only for his clean execution in the career of the ar. mas, undertaken by him briHantemenmente, but for his gifts of affability and kindness, which have won him many friends. > We wish to extend our most enthusiastic congratulations to Bociba, the young and pundonorable soldier. S THE ENGLISH STEAMER 4 ' A w | 'HORNEY CASTLE' i i i ,8 o ' S in port, admits cargo for " < " Santiago de Cuba (and Havana. 5 ' g Departing next Monday. 1WRTJAKR A g g I I SOBKINOS of erxram; I
Less than one percent of all men in the United States are college graduates More, that one percent of college graduates has given: 55 percent of our Presidents 36 percent of the members of Congress; 47 percent of the "Speakers" of the House of Representatives; 54 percent of our Vice-Presi-dents. 62 percent of the Secretaries of State; 50 percent of the Secretaries of the Treasury; 67 percent of the Attorneys' General; 69 percent of the Justices of the Supreme Court. V- - ' * At present the President, the Vico President, "1 "Speaker" of the House, all but two of the members of the Cabinet, 69 of the 96 Senators. 305 of the 435 Reps. and all the Justices of the Supreme Court are men prepared in colleges. The problem of national reconstruction demands a greater number of properly educated shoulders and women; better educated. Are you willing to cooperate in this regard? DO NOT ABANDON YOUR EDUCATION EDUCATION DEVELOPS THE POWER OF ATTENTION, MULTIPLIES THE JOYS OF LIFE AND PREPARES FOR SUPERIOR SERVICE Education develops our faculty of attention. The best stage caps are those who educate the mind in concentration and hold its attention upon a goal until it becomes light and joyful, developing the power which dominates all the forces of the mind and harnesses them to conquest and victory. "To focus attention on a problem until it is solved is a situation that belongs only to cultivated minds. The shoulder that can do that, is in conditions to obtain all that it desires because the world is always ready - to give way to the one that knows towards where it will walk _ By means of the education it is twinned with all the ages. Education enables him to understand intelligently all that the poets, the prophets and the wise men of all ages tell him. Education makes a man's life multiple, even in his n/lsma generation; it makes a man trust "in himself, even if he finds himself among other names, no matter what kind. It has been said, "A man with an education is limited in con- tact with life in a very few minutes, A broad education puts him in intimate and general contact with life." Education makes man manifold. The educated man lives longer during (Continued on 3rd. page.) Theater America TODAY-RASADO- GREAT PROGRAM Premiere in Puerto of the German film, Captain Hansen's Anntuns CONSUELO MAYENDIA With New .Couplets and the much applauded monologue San Joan por Dentro PO^TANDAS-7:15 and 9:15 Magaña SUNDAY- Last Function by the sympathetic -CONSUELO MAYENDIA The beautiful film "Double Speed" By WALLACE REED MATINAL with the film of the Night MATINES obn the MAYENDIA at POPULAR PRICES LAST FUNCTION TUESDAY 14- Eli GENIO ALEGRE Mr la BERTINI
s The great poet Gabriel D'Annunzio ti' has made in Fiume these statements □ ! which have produced great sensation in 1 (Europe: "Before allowing the enemies 3 . of Italy to surrender Jugo.Slavia, 1 myself will press the button, which is already placed in my headquarters, pa5 ra blow up Fiume, including my perso. na." -(BY TELEGRAPH) ■ i; ; t Caguas, December 10. EL MUNDO, San Juan Local association of sugar cane growers biographed the resident Commissioner in Washington begging him to extend to Puerto Rico legislation in favor of farmers currently pending before ' Congress. 1 begged him to second campaign in his illus । trado newspaper in the interest of the country's agricultural classes. Miguel QUINONES, President Cañas de Caguas Producers. Vital energies lost to tuberculosis Tuberculosis wreaks the greatest havoc between the ages of 15 and 45. * Its victims are among the most useful members of society, workers, servants and office workers. The total cost in losses caused by this disease is estimated at $500,000,000 annually. More than 1,000,000 people suffer from ¡tuberculosis this year in the United States. I two. It is the direct cause of 150,00 deaths each year in the U.S. ¡ "These losses of life, energy, ( । production and money can be prevented." * Tuberculosis is a continuing threat to the community, the home, and " ! the individual. And yet it is a preventable disease. The educational campaign is under the auspices of the Anti-Tuberculosis League of the Island and one of the most suitable means of carrying it out is the cooperation of the public, by purchasing Christmas stamps for letters now. 1 Buy League stamps and you will be relieved that you are helping to solve one of the great problems afflicting mankind. These stamps are distributed by members of the Anti-Tuberculosis League of Puerto Rico ( -co, Mrs. Palmira Gatell, Dr. Josefiha Villafañe Martinez, Mrs. Muñoz Mdta- ' les, Amelia de Frasqueri and Adela 'lie ( Gomez, ( In Puerto Rico 2,500 lives are lost every year, cut short, in bloom, by tuberculosis. Mortality is 8.40 per thousand of the general mortality, which in the last year was 23.3 per 1000. | j --------1 Portland Cement ¡ BRAND "ALSEN" We have on dock. ||< Unbeatable prices. Porto Rico Commercial Corp. TUFONOS 988-252. / . i
IE1 American Steamship I; "Chickamaug-a" j fission to San Juan about dember 12, will accept ■ , cargo for Northern European ports. 8 ¡ Address to / S1 The New York and Porto Rico S. S. S. Co. |
(FOR FRENCH CABLE ■ BERNE, Dec. 10.-The manifesto of the International Socialist Conference has been published, which calls for the union of the working forces of the world, in order to unite them in a formidable bloc to defend the Soviet Government of Russia against the intri. gues and deceptions of the enemies of reform among the oppressed peoples. The above-mentioned document contains declarations of great sensation for the socialists and ends by announcing the next conference to be held in Vienna on February 22 next year. The Council of the League of Nations has elected Gustav Muller, a member of the Socialist party, as the second president of that body. ROME, December 10. -All the officers of two war cruisers that entered the port of Fiume, abandoned the crew of the ships and took an oath of allegiance to the poet D'Annunzio. ! SEVILLE-The general strike of the workers has ended. VIENNA.-The National Congress is meeting for the purpose of making the.' scrutiny to elect the President of । the' Republic. So far the most probable candidates are Ueinbock, a Social Christian; Grate Seitz, a Socialist, and Dinghoffer, a Pan-Germanist. CONST ANTINOPLA. - The peace treaty between the Armenians and Kemalists has been signed. The Armenian territory will be reduced to the region of Eri ' van and the lake of Goktcha, except Alegandropol. The regime of the so- ¡ vieM installed in Ecivan. p WASHINGTON, 10. - Officially M coocen the measures to be taken by President Wilson with respect to the peace treaty, before he leaves the White House. Rumor circulates that the President will send a special message to Congress on the subject. WASHINGTON 10.--The United States Government has decided to relax "control'' of the administration of the Navy in Santo Domingo. On this occasion the State Department is preparing a decree increasing the hegemony of the local government of Santo Domingo, which will pass into the hands of the Dominicans. It is announced that the President has approved the recommendations concerning the frontiers of Armenia, - - V - GENEVA - The Council of the League of Nations reported favorably the request of Bulgaria to join the said organization. fpiÑTURAsl I VILLAMIL I g - See our announcement X . -in the |
We continue to beat the prices!
_ A S S Skirts S a f^n ) Skirts Silk Pli- ' zada (very fine $ all colors of _ 1 t HD ' $18 : Pique and S Gabardin Skirts washable and very nice Ce; oo $7.50 a "pD. > Serge skirts. Pli- < sadas, navy-blue and black from d "Q KQ $12 .. a "po.
t: ITT' ~T -í S? oweaters oe silk > ?< fine in all h>s ¿ Short* and sleeveless Lav} na Sweaters, i od os T^ana Sweaters for children, S to dog the. colors and sizes, ) Gonzalez Paáp Q., he - Su !m,P.R J
tints classes of " <9 47 II >' $3 ' S EtamíS < na blouses, good class ¿ for ladies of " <1 69 || ' <> Gimhk; g-am suits for girls 6 to 14 years, from 98 $4.50 ..a _ G EtamiU na and Organdy suits pap ra ladies styles <7 48 || p new from $12 . ® *P - -
Socialists of the World Agree to Defend the "Sovietist" Regime OFFICERS OF TWO ITALIAN CRUISERS LEAVE THEIR POSTS AND JOIN D'ANNUNZIO.
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 11, 1920.
eeeesooeooeooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteeteeteeteeteeteeteeeeeeeeeeeeeee Cheap Lumber! The schooner "David Cohen" in port, brought us A cargo of first class pichipen, with general assortment. J ► We wish to sell these woods in Malsoon, (San Juan) - AT SMALL COMPETITION PRICES 1 ; Be sure to see our representative there before buying or contact directly with M.DELGADO A CO. Arecibo, P.R. - | England will protest to the government of the United Kingdom.
England will protest to the U.S. government.
(ENGLISH CABLE) LONDON -The House of Commons will protest to the United States Government against the Irish campaign against England. MEXICO CITY. -The Senate agreed to grant a pension to the sons of General Felipe Angeles. MADRID: It is announced that King Alfonso will visit South America next year, accompanied by the Spanish squadron. Cuba will be the first country to be visited by the Sovereign. PARIS-The President of the Argentine Delegation, Sefior Pueyrredon, has stated that he will return to Geneva, if the motion presented by him is approved BRUSSELS-A former prisoner fired a revolver shot at the President of Parliament. The President was unhurt. Tomorrow is the premiere of the great circus Lowamte and Garner Tomorrow is the premiere of the great "Lowande Gardner Circus" which arrived yesterday in the United States and whose "debut" will be by all accounts, very lucid. The inaugural performance will begin at 3:30 in the afternoon with numbers of great interest and sensation. The large and elegant circus tent has been erected on the grounds adjoining the Carnegie Library. Messrs. Lowande and Gardner have i engaged an excellent Band, conducted by a competent teacher of * music, which was much applauded on the voyage from New York to Port Ri co, as it gave some concerts. The program includes 15 numbers of great merit and celebrated artists of great renown in the United States, who come to Puerto Rico for the first time. Of the "Lowande-Gardner Circus" we have the best references. All the newspapers of the United States praise the work of the artistic personnel and emphasize the morality that is observed there. Tickets for the performances are on sale at the Porto Rico Drug. Tomorrow night a grandiose fundón is prepared with a completely varied program. Given the excitement aroused by the arrival of the "Lowande Circus", we predict success for the Company, ORDINANCE APPROVED BY THE GOVERNOR The Governor approved an ordinance, repealing another, by which M granted permission to Martin Figueroa to hold and operate an all. jo business in the port of Aguadilla. SANTA ANÁ1 AROMATIC Alcoholic Salutine THE BEST SINCE 1885 Use it once; and you will use it always. For sale in all drugstores. WHOLESALE AT The Phansaceatical Ce. ef P. K. Phone 491* Santurce, Stop, 15
NUMBER 561.
Sto Domingo's asuu to be also injected.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 6. - ; Congressional Representative W. ARodenberg, of Ill., announced boy that the proposed Congressional investigation of the alleged misgovernment of the United States in Haiti, on which Senators and Representatives are returning to Washington, will also extend to the affairs of Santo Domingo. Rodenberg, who is a member of the House Committee on Government, recently announced that he was seeking authorization for a full investigation into the charges of misgovernment in Haiti and the killing of more than 2,000 Haitians by U.S. Marines. Rodenberg states that since his original clarification he has received reports that similar conditions exist in Santo Domingo and that he would request an investigation of the entire island. DON EUGENIO LOPEZ GAZTAMBIDE Accompanied by his distinguished wife, the excellent gentleman Don Eugenio Lopez Gaztambide, an illustrious lawyer who acted in this island with great lucidity, has arrived in San Juan. With the Gaztambide spouses, who have spent some years in Barcelona, has come the beautiful seflorita Avelina Marodán, from La Rioja (Spain), who accompanies the very precious co lyu ges, to whom we are pleased to send our most affectionate greetings of welcome. f , DON JOSE NORIEGA He has come to Ban Juan, where he will spend a few days, *! ABMleata cafeaUeUezo es pañol don José Noriega, resident éa Lajas, where he has created an exemplary family, which, for his great merits, has earned the ' sympathies of all. Mr. Noriega, who is a very enlightened person, has collaborated in the press of the country, in which his figure, endorsed by his noble and fighting spirit, has been praised. We are pleased to reiterate to our esteemed friend and excellent gentleman our most affectionate greetings of welcome. 36 "HOLSTEIN" COWS 36 cows of the "Holstein" class arrived in the United States by the steamer "Helen". THE "HORNBY CASTLE" Yesterday the steamer "Harney Castic" arrived from Liverpool, bringing 4,000 cows. This vessel comes with signature to Ezquiaga's house. THEATER -VICTORY GARDEN-TODAY SATURDAY TODAY-SECOND FUNCTION OF THE TRONE PKUEU with new numbers Also exhibiromo* the sensational and beautiful tape in six acts U OMM BE MIS FOB CEMUNIU FIRR1R muré m Amphitheater 40 ota.-Lunettes 20 "te.