THE AWND
8 pages 3 ctvs Semester, $4.00 One year, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau. 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
DAILY MORNING, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO ■
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO [
imiare "4 redar pren (Me. tal) - areata by ita Set of oetobar A !-!?. re fllo at ta Port Otare at Mea Jrew Fot" I W"" B. ordor at "be PmiR- A. M. F: i T ai ■ a artireaqH
! eTTae F**ez' - OBtee péAa '¿mT '( U a i "ed I at le "nr") eater "fce are at abarte < ten.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 4. 1920, ¡ MMERO 4?f.
Tributes to the marines of the battleship 'Alfonso XIII.'
(BY ENGLISH CABLE) 'NU Ai VA YORK, September 3.- The great banquet held at the Spanish Embassy in honor of the officers of the Spanish battleship 'Alfonso XIII, which was a sumptuous event, was attended by Princess María de Borbón, who was in Washington today. The Spanish Ambassador, Mr. Riafio, and the Secretary of State of the great Republic, Mr. Colby, gave very eloquent speeches GENERAL WRANGEL HAS FALLEN IN THE PETROGRAD RATONERA, September 3. The 150,000 men led by this leader were surrounded today by more than 200,000 "Bolshevikis", who have caused demoralization in the ranks of the Confederates. The Bolsheviks have asked Wrangel to surrender unconditionally, otherwise he will be shot as a traitor to Russia. The army of Baron de Wrangel, disbanded by the Bolsheviks, has had to flee to the coast of the Sea of Azoff, where it is demoralized. IMPONENT CELEBRATION OF TWO ANNIVERSARIES I NEW YORK, Sept. 3, -Great preparations are being made here to celebrate with extraordinary spirit the 163rd anniversary of the natimlen < to Lafayette and the sixth anniversary of the first battle of the Marne. On that occasion, patriot!- ■ eos mdaajes of congratulation will be sent to pre ' Bidents Wilson and Deschanel, to ge- [ natals Joffre, Foch and Pershing, and to the । socrutariq of State, Mr Colby. CORNEJO MADE GREAT PRAISE OF CUBA j BAN SEBASTIAN, September 3.-Rear-Admiral Honorio Cornejo ■ y Carvajal, former commander of the Spanish ship "Alfonso Kill", arrived here today from Havana and New York, and had a long interview with the King, about the great reception given by all Cuba to the Spanish ship, and the great reception given to the Spanish ship. The monarch heard the story of the incompar- । tible reception given by the Grand An- । tilla to the Spanish sailors. j
Film studio to open soon
' OUR IMPRESSION The work that has been going on for some months in the film studios of the Porto ■ Rico Photoplay Inc. located in the Hato Rey area, continues with great haste. We have visited the construction site and can say that it more than matches the magnitude of the project and the importance of the purpose. Everything there is distributed with art and taste. The new buildings have nothing to envy to those of equal quality to be seen in New York, and we may almost say that at times they surpass them in perfection and at others in capacity. Mr. Farnworth has had the good sense to personally direct the works, and we can assure you that he has done so with the utmost competence and great skill. As of today it can be said that the island has one of the most complete film studios, and certainly and without comparison, the best in the Antilles. In the series of constructions that for a short time now have been enhancing San Juan and its neighborhoods, both in terms of beauty and beauty, it has been the turn of the cinematograph. The new buildings meet all the conditions of comfort, luxury and art that are desirable.
WHAT THESE WORKS MEAN FOR US- , OTHERS Mr. Farnsworth has succeeded in ■ his purpose of placing Puerto Ri- ' co in a prominent place in the world of the cinematograph. The work of this distinguished American in the United States will prove most fruitful to the interests of Puerto Rico. So far he has succeeded in interesting in the business prominent citizens of the United States, who are planning to visit this island soon to learn and study closely the commercial conditions of the motion picture industry. These men do not want to fail to take advantage of the situation to prepare a financial operation and bring to the island the most renowned artists of the screen. Artists of recognized celebrity will be coming to Puerto Rico. Mr. Farnworth ■ is currently engaged in selecting the necessary elements to begin the work. THE "MANUEL CALVO" This afternoon the Spanish liner "Manuel Calvo" leaves for Havana, i It is carrying 2,800 emigrants for Havana. cargo, passengers.
Felix Lopez Jewelry The great assortment has arrived 3O°|o Discount Take advantage of it.
Lowering Prices I 20% j . Discount On all "Kirschbaum" clothing 1 - > ¿e ' ; $25. - $40. - $50. * $60. - $75. - and $80. Gentlemen's wool suits. (Afl weal - 1920.) ( Styles - 1920.) । Take advantage! Gonzalez Padin Co, Inc. - Cw Qtqp Vanda Of All. - San Juan. Ponce. Mayaguez. L ' í ' t- 1 -r
A submarine saved mUagrosameiite.
Poles and "bolshevikis" enter arrangements.-CentanarBÍ dr harmonians have been killed by the ^Kartai*'
(ENGLISH CABLE) NEW YORK, September 3.-The' i submarine "S-5", the engine having been decomposed, was submerged for 42 hours 45 miles south of Cape Henoepe. The miraculous salvation of the crewmen was due to the fact that they had received help by means of a buoy, which was carried by the submersible. The transport - General Goethals' felt the bell of the buoy, so he hastened to communicate with the submarine, which was urgently calling for help from the bottom of the sea. The . "Geneni Geekhahs" located at -the po ; eos ¿esputo" the submarine, which was danced ta ta vertical position, .togrando its carlp to lot, mooring it and introducing an air pump to it, after breaking ; the hull. Wireless notice of the mishap i was also received by a young man "5cloned to radiography at Farmington (Comheticut). who spread the nt"-' i tice. 35 sailors and 2 subI marine officers were saved early in the morning by the steamer "Atlanthur." MADRID-Immediately after the resolution of the ministerial crisis, King Alfonso XIII went to Bilbao to witness the launching of the ocean liner "Alfonso XIH", which was a great success. MADRID-Cardinal > Guísasela Menéndez, Primate of Spain, has died. VARSOVIA-The - - - Bolshevikis' ' and the Poles decided, after much discussion, to resume the peace conferences in Riga. FERROL,-The City Council, the Chamber of Commerce and the Presidents of the local companies have resigned their posts as a sign of protest against the central Government for not having yet begun the construction of the railway. The construction of the railroad from this port to that of Guijón has not yet been completed. All establishments and factories have been closed. PANAMA - The inter-oceanic canal ■ produced during the month of August close to a million dollars.
The inter-oceanic canal produced during the month of August about one million dollars. Three hundred merchant and warships crossed ' that month through the said waterway. MADRID-B1 Government has setalado special contributions for 5" years to the Basque provinces, which will enjoy, on that occasion, relative liberties. LONDON-On the 6th the conference of Ambassadors, which was suspended in July, will resume in Paris. GIBMY EL SUFRAGN) Cardinal Gibbons has just given his opinion on the effects of the law of the mfriigy for women in the following tfirmnms: 'I greatly deplore the fact that women have been thrown into the abyss and would have preferred things to remain as they were. Nevertheless, I am of onmion that after the first elec ¡ cm> or thereabouts a small porten | tion of the women of the country will make use ■ of the right to vote. i "It would be difficult to foresee now the efec * to of women's suffrage on the morale of the * country." DISTINGUISHED TRAVELERS l ! On the steamer Hannel Cairo sailed today for the United States, our distinguished friend, the Ledo. ' ; Salvador Suau, who is accompanied by his < be! a and distinguished wife Angelita ; P. de Suau. We wish him a happy trip and a pleasant stay in the North. DON VICTOR LOPEZ NUSSA ' Today embarks for the United States on business, aucsUo i distinguished friend Don Victor Lopez Nu- < ssa. known merchant of San Juan, ! We wish him a happy trip.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) Pavi", srpticiAbrC 3.-Ei President M. Deschanel and his wife have addressedi>í.i heartfelt telegrams of condolence to the family of Cardinal Amette. -The English newspapers, inspired by the boLshcvikis, publish the terms of a pretended treaty said to have been concluded between France and General Wnnge'. This document, fabricated by the Bolshevik agents, is absolutely false. Nefcio.- A sea rage has resulted in 30 killed and 500 wounded in the Odomari war. A large number of inhabitants are without h - gar.í i. .... -The latest news from Viesa says that the Romanian cabinet has resigned. Fiorescu tai all in charge of forming new Cabinet. Constnn'ii.opla. -The murder of 400 Armenians by 'os turVis in Anatolia is confirmed. Women and children are subjected to terrible martyrdoms and men shot in their homes. Forzoí-io. -The Polish communiqué says that a number of Biacian villages have been occupied by Polish troops. Local fighting continues in the Bug region. The Polish cavalry repulsed the enemy near Zamoe. In Galicia the Poles occupied new positions. Zurich. A Moscow radio announced that the Russians occupied all the positions east of Brest-Litowsk and that heavy fighting is going on in the Lwow region. ,- . Rome. -In the course of a rally held in Florence and in which the rally was advocating the reconcilement of the soviet government, a police officer was killed. The police carried out some charges, resulting in the death of two demonstrators. Berlin. -Polish patrols entered German territory south of Wilhelmberg, announced from Aiiemstein. -The Federal Council has forbidden the transit of war material through Switzerland.
MUNICIPAL THEATER < TODAY - Grand Premiere - TODAY j FROM DRIVER TO AIRMAN- ! Premiere! Premiere! ( LOS MILLONES DEL INGLES ¡ Rumbas y Canciones finales. ' SUNDAY MATINEE. - LOS MILLONES DEL INGLES LA HONRADEZ DE *UN OBRERO ■ Rumbas and final Boleros. POPULAR PRICES IN THE EVENING THE ARRIVAL OF THE ALFONSO XIII. Premiere! Premiere ■ EN BUSCA DE PLACERES. The company will say goodbye with Rumbas despanantes.
Hotel palace ¡ We participate to our < distinguished clientele, that | from the day lo. of septiem- ¡ bre, a chosen quartet, < will enliven the hours of al- i muerzo (from 11-1-2 to 2 p. j 04) and lunch (from 6-1'2 ' to 10 p. mJ, with selected ' dance numbers and con- i certain. ! In order that those who come to the meal and like to dance, may enjoy a few hours of recreation, we have dedicated a part of the dining room to the Ballroom. The Restaurant service during the days of the week, will be a la Carte as always, without alteration of prices, except on Sunday nights, that we will give a "Dinner Dance" from 7 to 12 p. m. in the Roof Garden at $2.50 covered.
' An Unpleasant Character Don't let yourself be do^iasr by the asi peaio. ai ma ma frótate o are larial poeqoe so Hprin evé r - tos PKDORAS tí&MDA DEL DR. ROSS. breadas a ia hora dÉ aeoOore. sre barate pora the teaperaaeato detaS^M* tajaes and rita. ' tere Ka mi. Se (rfisa and forran botone*. A CARAZO, Bmu St 72. Advt
Centralists look good I offer up to 800 tnaojadritia aaovos te 25 pounds at .M5 ton on tase wagon for immediate eobarque. Cotitesten follower as offer is made subject to confirmation and prior sale. E. M. Axny Tel 994. P.O. Box 9San Juan,
UNIVERSITY OF - PUERTO RICO College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts, Mayaguez, P. K V. Registration for the regular course of the College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts of the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez, will be held on September 10 and 11 and classes will begin on the 13th in all departments. Preparatory and university courses are offered in agriculture, sugar chemistry, civil engineering, mechanical and mechanical engineering and general science, leading to the degree of bachelor of science in any of these subjects. Those wishing to infamous can respect these courses may soUdtarians of the Bacter In torte sotar Wallace at Forbush, Miami.
NOTICE * TO THE CENTRAL AND OTHER INDUSTRIES Messrs. PIZA BROTHERS, s en C. of this pizza have received an extensive assortment of WATERPROOF COVER STRAPS, BRAND PELICANO, own pan fights which they sell at very limited prices*. PIZA HNOS^ 8. at C. . San Juan, P. R. 'T Advt. V Acetones pan Corpontiones las g S Eftrwt a preriea muy Hartados g |SMari PMht WMsl x Impresos te High quality 3^ * Luna 48 - BOX 842 - M 548 S I SAN JUAM A R. ' 5
GOOD-NOTICE Car owners are in such good shape, as they've imnatto ti di fíal problem with their tires by using the FISK RED TOP or aea the FISK RED rubber. Look at the cars you see and you will notice that most of them use RED FISK tires. THE FISK T1RESTORE JUXtal NELSON nivtT "Mrtnr .
i
L -U - MR. BBAUKR ■ %", toieni ii y B BUI0K V Request ttaetos L 8CS. DE L VHAAMIL A | CIA. P Saa Jasa
Those traveling on ' board the steamer ' "Manuel Calvo".
, On our mission to inform hem ■ 'visited yesterday ti "Manuel Calvo", which arrived from Spain j Ten o'clock in the day would be when we arrive- ¡ mos to the liner. In the boat that takes us on board, there is Dr. Vadi. of Mayaguez, who has come to receive two of his relatives who arrive from France. We meet Dr. Enrique Ruiiz Angula, a Cuban dentist, who is in 1? ■ Havana I -I was in Europe, strolling. My oñj cana is in Perseverancia street. number. 52 in Havana. Then introduce us to his friends' -Come, with me.-he says- We shake hands with Dr. J Re gtiío Vascones. who introduces us, at the same time. to his thick They come from Europe *E1 Mr. Vascose? is a doctor in Media ua of the College of Barcelona. Some years ago he graduated . He is a native of Peru. He has held the post of Chancellor of Peru in Barcelona for some time. His modesty is excessive. He tells us that he has nothing to tell us about himself. DON VICTOR LARCO FTF.RRF.RA Mr. Herrera has been a senator of Peru for twenty years. He was born in Trujillo. Ecuador His life has been a constant struggle for the welfare of the people of Peru. His life has been a constant struggle for the welfare of his country. ! > What was the object of his route to . What was the purpose of your trip to Enropa," he was asked. I went for a walk. Mr. Vascones mtorra rrpe. "Mr. Herrera was the first nu- j ? Peru's first timetable. His name, although > : he protests his modesty, is always on the - í "ticket " electoral There have been oca ísiOMs in one. hallandoee outside the country.... Mr. Herrera asks us if it will be possible for him to go ashore. (-- Have you had your passport stamped by the U.S. Consul for the United States? - No, sir. I thought it wasn't necessary and he tells us the story of L¿rco¡ 'Herrera: ! -He went around Europe studying different penitentiary systems. He has done all this on his own. He is ■ti first philanthropist of Peru. He has donated some millions for the construction of hospitals and asylums. Mr. Herrera asks if there are good asylums here After having visited England, France and Spain. France and Spain. After having visited England, France and Spain, we have not found what to answer him. We are silent! THE DK SALVADOR AITIA We salute this distinguished physician from the Republic of El Salvador. PEDRO TRUJILLO MIRANDA Trujillo Miranda is the author of vain (Continued on p. 3)
Puerto Rico succeeds in resolving victoriously at Camp Perry.
■LOS BOEICUAS". ONCE AGAIN VICTORIOUS HAVE OBTAINED NUMEROUS MEDALS Camp Perry. August 24, 1320/ Mr. editor of EL MUNDO Dear sir and inriy Although I have never held the reporting position of correspondent d" "w penóáüo. believing it to be of place and d" t¿tere? general for the public of our little island. ecu gusto voy a referarle nnostav viaie to this camp and the result obtained in les dististos tournaments te trio al Mineo. Ce me astea sa be. we left Rae Juan the day of July in the trasporta de! army ' ' ' Buford ' tanmos nn" magnificent crossing, arriving at New ei row 12. and that same day. tomastM the train pira this camp, arriving M next day. 13 <day of bad omen for us who believe in tanjas (for me the only one is that of the pocket) * E. temente Montesinos, rapitá" tejí "team", e" has behaved very well cob Eusctros and we are very grateful to him. He introduced us on our arrival to the corone' Mnmma írrector general of the Tournaments, and then showed us the tirios dei trio; this^s crossed by nna hrxnmsa road. *a" to which the ' blances are divined, and. beyond it Lake Erie. pr<. 1 aentanoo a t-onito pa i -> on ta- , do for those attuned to this "apórfL The Campamente is if if ifrii ■until situated, ideally p.?ra the object for which it : has been destined in rua i ttmensa llaaufi, 37 miles east of the city of T8.eao and opposite the rsia of Put in Bay. an te ri mal was fought the famous batata M 'lake Eme between the flota? amezacanaaA . ingiesa.s. The name of this aaparetiti to er in coinrem tract ón al a-mtrmto pn rry. hero of the hataca There are metaladas dpscientae Tujatas pa ra trio; de M"? 900 and 1000 yurfiaA and ;other so many... para-rizo do 200. 800 and 600 yards In addition 3^ tarjeteó pare¡el strip of pístela After having received ü ittñ fifi . sis (very necessary? ea this tirio) acon-jdamcs in les stores of fpr~ ¿ fia. and so qu&ao installed, near the lake Jan. the colony bcnrni. first gro (Continued on page 3.) ATTENTION I have the honor to inform my customers that the barbershop "Et Figaro", will be closed on Monday. . . -| Pedro Trujillo GwiL i NEEDED; A salesman for taponan and juna ros de pauto who has experience eu ■ Puerto Rico. Must fie good teféiaij "¡ cias and sa aoltaw j Address to P. O. Box 51& Atet,
ROYAL GREGG SCHOOL This is the most accredited col^ic on the island of Puerto Rico, and the ONLY one recognized by the Board of Examiners of Stenographers of the United States of America. Government, in Central Banks, Banks, etc. Young people from all M>r yuebios of the island and from other countries come to study in this school GREGG shorthand courses in English and Spanish". - Classes of Commercial English and Commercial Carespondmicla At the end of the course the student will receive an artistic ?Mploma and will be provided with a new course on the 6th of September. Pao" to msiriculaXE today. Director: MARIA T CAMACHO DE ROBLES. Alton" 80 Graduate of Otan tic Course. Cana Ran Juan. P R. and Normal and with 10 years of experience.
Central, Boat Companies We have in stock: Black Vamish, Galvanized Nails, , Tar, . Chalk, Stopa. Carlos Arartmg e ^os. Soca. PONCB BEACH, P. R.