elmindo
8 pages 3 ctvs Semester, $4.00 One year, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau. 81 I TeL 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
UO 11 I SAH JUAN, PUERTO RICO ¡ j
ru&utete "O* dambrate andar swaüi (K" sort Ae" of aatabar S, 1S1T. aa "la at tbs Faat Odes ef fltejaaa. .miar ot toa Prt "a- a. A a a Bnriam. IV t- - riLta?
Conspiracy 'bolshevlki' against the government of Italy.
"(BY ENGLISH CABLE) BOMA, September 17.-"Bolshe▼ikism'' has begun to take terrifying increase in the principal towns of the country, where it is spreading with all speed to the countryside The alarm is indescribable Many cities are in a state of war. The police have discovered a macabre plan, which had the purpose of forcing the Government, threatening it with revolution, to recognize the Red Government of Russia The head of the Government, Mr. Giolotti, has been forced to intervene personally to solve the serious struggle that has arisen between the metallurgical workers and the bosses _ RIOTS IN ZARAGOZA MADRID, September 17. -A tumultuous demonstration was held here today, promoted by women, to protest against the sale of adulterated bread, which is sold in the capital and in the three provinces of Aragon. During the demonstration there were beatings and fights, for which the public forces were forced to intervene. MADRID, September 17The victims that have resulted so far from the unfortunate event occurred in the,island of Manora, as a result of a mistake of the Commander of Artillery directed military practices, are ■B capita and nine wounded soldiers. The tragedy was caused by the firing of a battery of cannons, dlndeeieadv to more bad signal
BXRRIOS AND BULGARIANS WERE . BELGRADE, September 17.-The Yugoslav-Slav Government ratified today the peace treaty with the Bulgarians. The news has been received in both nations with great enthusiasm. EXTRAORDINARY MEETING IN THE CAPITAL OF THE REPUBLIC PARIS, September 17.- The Concho of the "League of Nations'' has summoned, with all haste, a meeting, to be held tomorrow ^8.
The Ambassador of Spain in Paris, Senor Quiñones de Leon, has been commissioned by the great powers to summon the congressmen.
Royal Dutch Mala Real The steamer '-JAI VAN NASSAU" Will be dispatched this afternoon for BAN PEDRO DE MACORIS AND SANTO DOMINGO erre. Admits cargo and passengers. Interested parties should contact the agents today morning. Sacs. Ai L ViNnil & Co. Dept. of Agencies. Tel. 580. marine, S. J.
Drs. Howard and Grant returned to New York.
On the steamer "Mohiwk" embarked for the United States Drs. Howard and Grant of the "Rockefeller Foundation," who have made a study of our sanitary problems in general and especially of the Ai Uncinariasis question. They are going to make their definite recommendations to the International Board of Public Health as to how they should cooperate with the P.R. Department of Health in the eradication of the serious scourge of anemia of our peasants. They paid a visit to the In i sular Sanatorium which stands in the vicinity of Rio Piedras; their impressions were very satisfactory. "The "City of Hope" is making rapid progress; the electrical installation is complete; the library building is almost ready; the trees planted along the wide Avenues are beginning to show the first leaves on their branches; the sick children who have had the fortune to obtain their income express their satisfaction for their improvement and well-being.
It is a pity that so few can still be found in relation to the enormous, overwhelming, exhorbitant number of applications, which rain down on the officials of the Health Department, accompanied by all sorts of recommendations and pleas, and sometimes even tears. The plan of cooperation between the Rockefeller Foundation and the Department of Island Health will soon begin to unfold. And in the meantime he will bid a fond farewell to Drs. Howard and Grant, as he bade farewell to Dr. Heisser; messengers of good and of philanthropy, as well as of prjgregso and of science.
NEW DETAILS ON THE IN - (TENDER OF MAYAGUEZ (By telegraph) Mayaguez, February 16. San Juan. The violent fire which destroyed the "La Mallorquína" building caused immense losses. The insurance amounts to $135,000, although the losses exceed €20C.00C. THE CORRESPONDENT Headaches come from intestinal poisons. Take LIFE PILLS FROM DR. ROSS to unload your intestines and you will feel your head clear. Sio Notice
Trucks Salesmen Good Trucks'' and Automobiles salesmen are needed, with good references and proven experience. San Justo 13-15 P O. Box 782 San Joan, P. R.
DEALER ME. DEALER Stock Sizes and,". %", metric and BUICK Request prices 80S. BE L. VILLAMIL * CIA. Ban Juan
HOTEL PALACE . - f --- OFFERS: "Lunch - Dance" AT THE ROOF-GARDEN Every Sunday from 7 to 12. PÁ*A US BESERVACNMIES LLANE TO THOSE WHO DO NOT RESERVE BESA, IA ORONA ML HOTEL I NR TBIDRAN WASTE TO THE RARE. RESERVE YOUR TABLE IN ADVANCE £ i - 'i A -
-- ^"3 etaas auacar. f ekrasry 11. l "n. ** *" r "p QUw at Saa Parta Riae. -f"-aadar O" Act af wwto < 1ST"
Gonzalez Padin Co. Inc. - - - - THE HOUSE THAT SELLS EVERYTHING - - - - - -
O F R E C E :-; GREAT DISCOUNTS ON Clothing made for Ladies, Gentlemen and children. Stockings, Household Clothes, Shoes and Underwear*. Come in right away and take advantage of our discounts GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC.
Numerous personalities of New York welcome the sailors of the "Alfonso XIII" Commander Gonzíln Billós was welcomed by the Admiral of the Atlantic Squadron, in the flagship "Peansyivuia".
(FROM THE NEW YORK PRESS " f On Monday, (day six), at five o'clock 1" ; afternoon, she entered New York harbor. It had left Annapolis at five o'clock on Sunday morning, and it was generally believed that it was only to arrive in this port on the seventh " The battleship, in front of the Statue of Liberty, fired, saluting the port, the twenty-one cannon shots that are customary. They were answered in-mtai rtmro -n te by the batteries of the fort on Governor's Island. The "Alfonso xm" entered the Hudson River and went to anchor in the middle of the river, in front of 72nd Street. It was not until Monday afternoon at three o'clock that the official news of the arrival of the "Alfonso xm" was received in New York. A telegram, written in English and signed by the commander of the ship, Mr. González Billón, announced to the president of the Spanish Chamber of Commerce the arrival of the ship on the same day, Monday, from four to six o'clock in the afternoon. The holiday of the day prevented ii transmission of the news to the members of the Board organizing festivities, i Upon anchoring in ei rio.el "Alfonso XIII' [ " saluted with seventeen and seven cannon shots to the flagship of the U.S. Atlantic squadron. battleship Pen silvania. which is anchored there same ■ mo with other large units of 11 - North American squadron The ship ame I ' licano responded almost immediately. Mr. Gonzalez Billon made the vi ; sita de estilo to the admiral in chief of । the Atlantic squadron, in sn tuMQnc ! insignia. This visit was paid to him on Tuesday morning.
VISITING THE BUQC¿ 1 On the banks of the river. a le lar.?© of Ei- , very; of Drive, a numerous mucbedunibre was assembled by tomorrow morning can ( the p-purpose of visiting the battleship In j gasoline boats and'rn all sorts of "s . bsreaclones were transferred to the ship, where numerous boats also arrived from Brooklyn and other towns, which included a large number of families and caba- । । । । lleros of the Spinel Islands. All ■ they were Tiritando al Alfana km coustaateuL-onte during all ' yesterday . The Spanish warship has been visited by numerous North Americans, as well as by journalists from all the New York newspapers, photographers from all the news services, and they have been taking pictures of the ship and its principal officers, in every conceivable position and all day long. the "* cameramen '' "of all the film companies. > The ship is anchored in the heart of Pensilvama and Nevada, in the middle of the river, so that to go aboard it is necessary to embark in small boats. Boats are most easily taken on a u-selle paced at Riven ride and " Eighty-third street. Ccrrespcndiendo The visit that ei co- , commander of the "Alfonso TIU" le btm on Tuesday and estero aboard the Spanish beque the head of the Atlantic ncr- ii tea m erica na squadron THE COMMANDER GONZALEZ BI I LLON: li |l Surrounded by several dozen fo tographers. and dispoméndeoe to ero narrar-.
sü in an Iziscbi to gasoline in the ettaí has to be born the visit to the naval anteódañe^ of the port, the comaEidante Gsn zález BíEósi. estovo cauversaiaiia a while with is reporter of LA PRENSA. The se ñor ce mandante is rstst i * ámente young il and his talk presents it from the yr->eUEOiniCntO CiTH-Wh Slcoo iie fy* ir y süiEpatÍJL "Only attentions and -fitmeras I have received during my trip, says the romaEian te Unforgettable attentions in Cuba, where they esfoarzaren púw ja-- y pi ementarnos homenajes le r q¡ne we will not be able to forget: in Puerto Rico as well as in Puerto Rico, there was such warmth and affection, such sincerity in all the tributes that were made to us, that we were deeply moved. I will say that when we weighed anchor from Cuba we left Puerto Rico in complete silence. That silence of those who, rintitoidese with desires to cry, calis n in the solemn mentos .Oh' Aquella saHdi del * * * Alfonso HU'* de Puerto Rico The comata ante Gonzalez Eillñu is reclining on the barandill-s of the ship. " at the bow. Alá same, agitated by tí ríen . to. waves the red flag and jarifa, com 'tí shield in the center. Mr. coima ndaate GonzálezBiitaiu has phrases of thanks and gratitude for Jos officers of the American navy, who in Ansjáppoñ¿. in Wash . ington and now in New York seto aten ..ñones kan tenido par" los oSoaJe? and triyulstes of the Spanish acorarido ; Momesstos after having these words to the reporter of LA FREN SA tí commander González BUJóbu. accmpvMdo by the captain of the American ana riña Parker, subject a boat to (Ctatíiuña in the pádna X).
A thrilling episode ocnrrido in hiedo Rico.
"IF ti admiral Cenen turned out and nanny e pisar b has mrima, tetes the mricenos would escottarían him h hmenaje../"-íiji the Secretary * State. >r. Coby
The New York press reproduces the following statements made there by the Commander of the Spanish battleship "Alfonso XAH", in which he praises this Island: "Mr. Gonzalez Billon was pleased to relate amply and amenamen to all that was done in honor of the "Alfonso XAH'' since her arrival in America: the stay in Cuba and Puer ¡ to Rico, the visits to Norfolk, Ann "poli u and Washington, the visits to the United States, the visits to the United States, the visits to the United States, and the visits to the United States. Ann "poly u and Washington, the first im pr- ions of New York ... He also referred to the festivities with which he was honored at ■■Mtres m.irima in Cuba and Puerto Rico and said frankly that if "the enthusiasm of Havana was spent in frenzied arismerions, that of Son Juan de Puerto Rico was more intimate, deeper, more iMBREiaiant^ because the s-rion "was so intense that one did not know how to eat manifSBtaxla. When we said good-bye to Puerto Meo -recalled "i Cnmsn- ■
daute- the heartfelt attitude of that noble people, without even a hint, was something that entered us to the bottom of our soul.** A no less emorienirte ipimPie of the stay in Pnerta Rico was the visit made by the sisters who have their CMEMBte at the entrance of the bay of Mu Juan. SaM do is that these holy sisters have for cnstambre the ña saladar Mk foot with a great flag espinela to all Spanish ship qna enters ñ f pnerto de Ban Juan. RM la Üñns with the "Alfonso Xlll", paro pañañéndoles small M M Mnmnsje. sapH I carón, ya fenindo < ship qna aa | lap dejase toad. Caacañiña al paraúso. the nuns, as Aaqwflla^ mvadieron the deck" nbasanias ñM ¡i ■ña tagónM MtnsiaaMb and apaaaMfiHB ■a a panana under "t anpaaa of the| flag reja y gMHa_-MM waved OB í Rapa, Ya art the MMwa^iwMM I
i . ronse coo mirtico fervor and Ja besartiu Dorando de afr"^," la La entena fué ver . dadenmente cmamovedera. From sws visrias to Norfolk. Aampe 1 lis and Washington, tí Orna talante Gom ralez BHlón. can only say qw la hidalga renpomt que a los martes es pañetes se ha bache by the aMoñda Q des and oCñalídades -utesamirii ■■■■ ex cedió a cnanto hnhíera podido Magi■ane. cera" detail well sigdlñiMiv" re cardó tí sébor González BOtem qne tí Secretarte de Estaña, Mr. CMby. alndienñe a les herassams de la Warms "Ewiñais durante la g$aia os los iMfiaB" IMdeq, MM a decir, espon ñ"- SOW: "B. MM" i. atetonñon ¡"W "slM* sestimns for the mnniws and so tíMen" the vwMsri- * * * sMb even in the "as ' **Wracta, that ñ tí tí almi " ammfcam, tañes the ame [ Irlm- i" mrsllitf m hiMMajrv 9
SATURDAY, SEPTBKE 18. OF 1020. | M M MERO 4 "S
A beautiful eihi- Fifteen politicians bition portorriqoo- wish the Presiña in New York dence of France.
"FROM HUDSON CITY o The " As'Líiaaón Portortíqneña." te dads bare a year. in this traibra I ja despzcúo. but sssdua and ñrmensonte.. Its Bise, are altzaBonte patrirtárz* The fundamental is ■'Maintain iz ñdad pertorurqueña ce Isw Eria-dot 'Uñados to the altora maral intellectual and s® till that the anemia Patria deserves and gaUardamente crienta. "The intellectual and social culture of .3. R;. c® should be H.n. more and better ronmiii. poeste pueb U©... ¡p'ZiTi'ZL? dif eIÜG> i'FP'CZui'? great part eH w ¡m politic" of that country This pretal- not p-<to deny Port Rj.r® that to ' that people belongs, sol;, a jnriert.? of the lack of capacity: and the topandad of Port Ear® s® manifest to gra.-.n .n height, ajii: but it is necear not m* t mm well be m-anifierie here. And the "Asoc.iaicidn PoTtomqueña ' sustains that ¡ideal and pursues it ron steadily U" of its latest agreements is tí de ''levar a Exlmbucicei de La tabres y obras tíe ¡mane de Puerto El pregrazaa de tan patriótoeo festival q taina de .celebrarse en "imu- im pre,. n=K in you "Hotei WaMorf ierr-s ' very is brief will be put ea remes for Puerto Rato Our lady* portom quenas with sacred to tos works of laboies ñe ¡irano. and aq®títos mué is deidicaa to the steent --¿-"t-a must to pies,usarse to coutnbuir with tí predmrto of its irteligenría and aridmdad to realize aqnei festival. That is why we are not hesitant to give it publicity. It is short tí tí tiemyc and it is dimembre the excas-ón "ejor to exiebrar ama Ttvihch-u.-ón of La bores here, with Jos purposes, that the ' Association perrigoe. Also mnesfiros mnesfiros * artiítks es. pimtera. in mp. d "sa. tzrfiisitas works, sculptors, rítaos must. " miiL with something K© is about disputing ios best artists of the -iwt s n It is about démoste ^r hez tw má the degree of ctíteia of our people and -cuEteibuiiT a karea that the naments Labor es industry of Wangs alean re a better porición in tí field crjmi "rSi on the one hand enñaquecíeron nejas ■ industries and srtes of mestna country e.If, on the one hand, we have lost old industries and companies in our country and, on the other hand, we have feared the awakening of new industries that would come to retain our losses during the last twenty years and to achieve that ? ! twenty years And to achieve that ñnalidadneme the Exhíñinau of Laberes. Know me, then. The fatan-r;* pertom 9 quenas that are "rnsagran in the beautiful Is - la to aquetas Laberes. 2L 22. and 23 ,*e - 'di ñembre next will sum m ñsas of - ji íCoCoKtimnma ea Ha i Se plisa and forran buttons. ACARAZO, Bran St 72. 11 Advt.
í BREWERS I Ízw i We offer harñna GOLD ? MEDAL- old wheat quality J Í Ísuperiorisima at convenient prices. J | B.FenMe&HwsSKs. I 4- San Juan. 2 ♦ X
GREAT ECONOMY
you get by using tez gwms.s FISK RED TOP or RED FISK, ia# mates are garazrtuated P® 1 5.9W' maFas, but are soteepasan p®r muid" of this vriWafe ¡j Have you ever noticed ñe kw ¡nn" etas ntes that wsar tes FISK RED TOP ranges? ¿Quisv you fit mo ..tiv" per e" eral the dueáM of before ¡i Jas prefer? C""Pve a. ppmcastía to cart and ti táempo Je tera ti motiTe. THE FISK TIBE STORE ADRIAN KELSON Dtetiibfflter Advk
i Tobacco Harvesters.
(POB CAELE INGLES" PARIS f "tMSEbre 17.-Pasar de 1" Haas preunnentes politisos de ja í>p6-, bisca fráufiresa that "e ñiíyutar ti r¡argr de. Pros. ásete, and q,,," eicpezafc a ta.-er srtirw deal iof for ti )" se Fu.* asjurats "res. Ls Juicta is so close, ^-ne e? pr" habí, une rurjar two or three duets to inte 1 : te. yrromrndOT pn- B^^aaities more exaltad®®®. Among the candidates for the "jrptoMie" are cited ex-Miairtr" Cha. ríes JobEZx". the ex-itaiurtro Leon Brurgeoir. tctxal President of the "S? sedad de las N acuna?" the Presaderte dti Ama d®. the iefe dti Gtibnenn®. Mr vr-rie raud. y.. j<sr ñítmK". ai atoeresiwr de érie. Mr ClenDesireau... A "OMEA BURSTS IN A MINISTRY VALPARAISO, srijefufibre 17. Wajtanrt-rei Gotoera-?. water terota haateraer.de q-which taya suteSTeuiiiP for Itoc.v? - grax pril'le-ixa que' to ectapendiente óe stílnaakóa between 3 a repóblica de Cfcu" y ti Peru, a prspóiñ t® fe la gravt ruertwm de Twna y Ami. In the Miiustent of Juetacia.. es icio of to* most beautiful tarfar-im of the ■oayitai of Ckcje.. erupted this morning ma bmtto.. that nroduj® take "m"; gaños and tend es slight. MOVEMENT aniAMPviK:- in the CAPITAL pe POLAND VARSOVLA "titiesEbre 17.- the Dejegaerdn pa-^ca ejegifa to tmuar psr te is lae Có®fe!rerm.a.s of ia Peace a ips msTOR. arrived in Riga, prsrederte ñe Dantziag. dmde ta mrimrdries- leroimataes of Jos Powers ñe Entente, ¿e yield tone j© more p?>rible in the prsptaiñones ^n" was to be be cub to Rusta, er virtue óe having ira taño nutom-em:"? ronTiñsrTw "tobteo rXif in ti inisraB ccrazñn of Pnl® X- ia csnDúliall. DESCHANEL'S RESIGNATION TO THE- PAÓT-aMEWTO PARIS, setierabre 17,-E' Goinemw has publMadto the note Gñ-mai in which the next meeting ñtí . presaderte fe Francis is tonñrnna . Mr. In the ®rta it is stated that the reseIncMra of the President of the Republic is trrev-wreble due to the raal estad® ñe r"£Dd and. all., the perturbation mes such that > produje ti haber taad® del treu.
| VICTORY GARDEN ® TODAY SATURDAY Today g DEBUT DEBUT ® of Oa nolabih'siwrta and beSla g HARIA GABBI g NOISIOUS SUCCESS. g Táimibiién exhibited the pire. a cuas© premiere in 7 acts g THE FRUIT OF EFFORT g TWO tandas DOS o Amphitheater 40. Lunettes 20. o
Hanna of pure wheat, MONARCH brand for the cultivation of tobacco. We can deliver during October and November. Reserve in time the quantity that remains or B. FERNANDEZ Y HNOS. SUCRS. San Juan.
P. SCHIRA & Co. LADIES' DEPARTMENT the last steamer we have relapsed a large assortment of sm_ breblouses in tricolette. of the latest fashions and in all colors. We have also reopened fall hats and suits and overcoats for shipping. Large assortment in suits^Se Iricolette and crepe georgette. Of 25 and 33 pesos, worth much more. .