elmíndo
i 4 pages 3 ctvs. Semester. $4.Or Un "fio, 97 .M
Office" 5 S BaivaGor Brau. í Td. 833 P O. Box 344 L_ i
MORNING DAILY. EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
YEAR U
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
i'uoiumed ana distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized by the Art of October S, 1917, on file at the Post Office of San Jaan, Porte Bieo. By order of the Praaidoafc. A._ * Bnrleaon. Postmaster General
tntered a a second class matter. f e b r u a r y 21, 1919, . at the Post Office at San Jaan, Porto Rico, (United I i i States of America) andar the Áet of march S. 1879 I
j SATURDAY, JUNE 5, 1920.
. NUMBER 402.
Stones, sticks and shots of revol- " verjnjoa Baja
The first encounter between Republi canos and Unionistas took place in Toa Baja, when a group of voters belonging to both parties provoked a serious collision in which they were wounded and bruised, unharmed and seriously injured. Our correspondent in Toa Baja telegraphed us a few hours after the events occurred. Partisan sentiment, festering passion and opposing political tendencies were the substantial factors in the serious riot, perhaps the result of unpredictability and passion. The circumstances surrounding the event and the details that preceded it, were collected by a Be dcator of EL MUDNO, according to the statements made before the Prosecutor, witnesses and promoters of the riot. The very worthy Chief Igaravidez has also helped us in the search for information and told us yesterday by telephone the most outstanding details of the collision. REPUBLICANS IN THE ROWS At about ten o'clock at night some Republicans were occupying the first turns for the inscriptions that were to be verified yesterday. The proceedings of blind violence began when the voters were very excited; and in fact, about half past ten o'clock, a terrible fight began between Unionists and Republicans, with gunshots, stones and sticks. Attracted by the fray, the police of Toa Baja, under the command of Chief Ramón Azpurúa, intimidated the disturbers of public order to surrender; but far from this, the riot continued, resulting in the following injuries: Pascasio Márquez, knife wound; Ezequiel Concepción, with several wounds in the back; Cruz Melesio, a bullet in the leg; and Mr. Azpurúa, chief of police, a contused stone wound in the leg and in the left knee. Chief Igaravidez, from Bayamón, accompanied by some policemen also went to the site of the events. Chiefs Sbanton and Dobby left for Toa Baja, returning yesterday afternoon. Neither in the detective's office, nor in the Police Headquarters, nor in the Governor's office, nor in any of the official centers, had any information been received last night of the serious events we have just reported. Triumph of the Practitioners The Director of Prohibition has received from the United States the model permits for the use of alcohol, requested by the minor surgeons, who, having filled the necessary requirements, will be able to prescribe alcohol. This is another triumph for the minor surgeons, as once again the federal government recognizes the practicing profession. Mr. Fournier, Secretary of the Association, is the one who has worked the hardest to obtain all these advantages for the humble 'professionals, for which we congratulate him ON THE "MANUEL CALVO'' The following passengers embarked for Cuba: Juan J. García, Amalia Fernández, O. de García, Eva García, Matilde García, Juan García, Conchita Garda, Miguel Salgado, G. Gómez, Lidia F. de Gómez, Mateo Fajardo, Ed gardo Porce, Juan Alvarez, Andrés González, Antonio Torres, Ovidio Garda, Luis González, María B. de Rodríguez, Bafael Mulet, Femando portilla, José Combas, José E. Morales, Belén Rivas, Epifanio Vidal, José Rodrigues, Luis Ortiz, Blanca Guasch, Mercedes O. de Espine, Juan Espine, Roberto Boyd, AtiMo Colis, Luisa Colis, Gloria CJolis, E Brand. Julián Mendín, Leonardo Morían, A. Echevarría, A. Quiñones, M. Pazos, F. Mufiagorri, F. Becerril, Maria Jimenez, Juan Jimenez, Vicente Rosario, José Solis, Luisa San jurjo, D Guerrero, O Navarro, Manuel Cepeda, E. Rosario, Gonzalo González, Juan C. Velez, V. León Garda, José A. Mojica, Melitón González and Nicolás Limero. INSCRIPTIONS IN LAS MARIAS Las Marías, June. 4, 1920. EL MUNDO San Juan. Immense enthusiasm. So far Unionists 638. Republicans; So daüstas 21 THE CORRESPONDENT. A DIVORCE Bn the suit filed by Josefina Rodrígase against José Vleens on divorce, Judge Campillo declared the suit admissible and imposed costs on the defendant. < loeoeeeeeoeeeoeeeoeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee"""^ íí FOR SALE o ¡ ¡ < ¡ A plot of land OM the Mnlecdn, Mermo < 2800 eifni ceedreds" a. tsoado p.Atntir. a-,p-*- <
War breaks out between Poland and the Czecho-Slovakia.
A big conference in Paris
(By Cabla French) PARIS, June 4.-On the 10th a conference will be held in this city which is said to be of extraordinary scope and at which England, Spain, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Switzerland will be represented. Sweden, Norway and Switzerland. The purpose of the Conference is to establish a common plan of action for the protection of credits in Russia. RUSSIANS WANT CONDITIONS LONDON, June 4.-In the course of a conference held today by Lloyd George with Krassini, the latter asked that the blockade be lifted as soon as possible, and demanded, as one of the main conditions for the restoration of peace, the resumption of commercial relations. Late dispatches report the arrival in Paris of Prince Mlgassi Kuni, brother-in-law of the Japanese Ambassador, who intends to hold a military training course in one of the academies of the Republic. THE ALLIES DO NOT WANT FRIENDSHIP WITH THE RUSSIANS LONDON, June 4.-Uoyd George did not want to deal with Krassini, representative of the Russian Government, but only with economic questions, since both England and France have firmly decided to avoid contact with the Soviets. According to "Le Petit Parisien'', Italy will adopt the same attitude. GREEKS TO TAKE OVER A TURKISH REGION LONDON, June 4.- Reports from Gumudjina say that Greek troops have begun to take possession । of the territories in Thacia which were granted to them in the Versailles deliberations. The chiefs of the Greek and French armies of occupation announce, likewise, the occupation of Dedeagath by Greek troops, which were disembarked this morning. The order is complete. The event at Puerta de Tierra Last night a rally of the strikers was held at stop six at Puerta de Tierra. One of the speakers by the name of Eduvigis Pagán took the podium, saying some harsh words to the police, to the point that Chief Martínez was forced to make him leave the podium. The speaker descended and the event ended, to the deaf protest of many of the attendees who did not like the police's actions. SHOOTINGS IN MIRANDA Shortly after the meeting, which ended at half past eleven, a couple of guar dias were making their way through the Miranda neighborhood. Suddenly shots were fired at the guards. The police repelled the aggression by also firing. One of the guards could see under a house the legs of an individual who was hiding there. The policeman fired at the feet of the man, who, together with others, abandoned his POSITION. Among those fleeing, Corporal Emanuelli recognized a soldier. He was searched a short time later by the Regimental guard, but no weapon was found. However, we can affirm, because we have seen them, that in Captain Schettini's office there are two projectiles and one bullet of those used in Army pistols. In spite of the efforts made, the police were unable to make any arrests.... Nor were any injuries reported. As it turns out. Puerta de Tierra is turning out to be a hotbed of this kind of events. Not a day goes by without the press giving an account of some bloody event, of more or less importance, that has taken place there. DECLARATION OF HEIRS In the ex-parte case of Eladio Alicea Pérez, regarding the declaration of heirs, Judge Campillo authorized Miguel Alicea, so that in the name and as defender of the minors Juana Dolores and Clotilde Alicea Pérez, he may concur to the granting of the deed of sale of the described rustic property, in favor of Estalislao López Berrios. THE CASE OF THE BROTHERS. RAMOS For Tuesday is indicated the cazo of the Ramee brothers, by esesinats The Rano* cení brothers will remember the readers, force loe that gave death to his pidrastrn, pesque this one another penó to his mj- * fall him will defend the Licenciado José do 2. 8*1 mj, | PASAJE f f f ' ' ' Se Sean c "m| IMS "pintea"- ( , Owe for the **** X O O ña 9 M cerrieale par taa psaj^ atm aápar é ' ' ' "m niga ea the pane* o 4 ► -**- a-ma i- ▼ ¡ ► Sparfada">k Teléfeae 2*2 Y < O Saá JMa. Letter Mea. ♦
FRANCE FEARS FEAR OF BEING WITHOUT HEAD OF STATE PARIS, June 4.- The newspaper "Le Petit Journal'' assures that in certain political spheres the necessity is insinuated of an immediate convocation of a congress at Versailles, for the purpose of modifying the Constitution and instituting the office of Vice-President of the Republic. In spite of everything, "Le Matin'' states that, from the consultations of the most famous doctors, it appears that the President of the nation, Mr. Deschanel, does not suffer any serious injury, and that a few -hands of absolute rest, will restore his health completely. "Le Journal*' adds that Mr. Deschanel will keep abreast of political affairs; he will preside, in case of urgency, at sessions of the Council, but will abstain entirely from attending official ceremonies.  THE BELGIAN GOVERNMENT IN CRISIS BRUSSELS, June 4. -Due to the heated debates which followed a heated speech delivered by Mr. Renkin in the Council of Ministers, your Government was forced to resign en masse. It is feared that the situation, which is more indecisive than ever due to the upheavals caused by the war, is worsening. A POLISH GENERAL IS SURPRISED PARIS, June 4.-General Pilsuky, who is in this capital, questioned by journalists about the bellicose attitude of his country, was astonished, because the above-mentioned reports, which presage war, are contrary to the telegrams he received yesterday from Warsaw. The strike on the docks Referring to the attitude of the shipping companies in not accepting the arbi- suit, Mr. J. M. Balzac, secretary-treasurer of the Marine Unions, tells us: In view of the statements made by the Directors of the shipping companies and their refusal to submit the strike on the docks to arbitration, since they hope, according to their statements, to starve the workers; in view of this attitude, the Local District Council of the Workers' Unions of the island has agreed to request the financial solidarity of all the friends of organized labor, regardless of their political affiliation or religious beliefs. A Commission of marine workers will go out to solicit help, in order to maintain the strike, since the workers are determined to starve to death, according to Mr. Balzac, rather than submit. PRICES OF CLOTHES AND SHOES ARE EXPECTED TO BE REDUCED The New York Costume Manufacturers' Association has addressed a telegram to all its members requesting a reduction in prices. This implies that the public no longer wants to buy silly as before. Another telegram from Boston says that there has been a great reduction in the production of shoes in Massachusetts. DIAZ DE MENDOZA TO OPEN IN NOVEMBER. A THEATER IN NEW YORK Don Fernando Diaz de Mendoza has just signed a contract for a tour of the United States, where he is to perform 24 plays* of the Spanish repertoire Mr. Diaz de Mendoza will open a theater on Broadway, next November, and will tour the most important cities of the United States, then go to Havana, and, probably. will come to Puerto Rico, then visit Buenos Aires. Los Iiiequlues lo Suda y On Tragi miséis i Insil sgriflca da la vida nacional, dividida en tres fresas, en la qpe fr^zaáofr al azul del cMa de Espada, aaa Bastas bizarras y sangrientes, su hofinbn guocnroa y sus aaaores trágicos. Gouifal intecpretadéa da Raqart Manar an el papel da tltlaaflla Blanca Dos corridas da tocos séMMaa con las fade *** **Cnm TRES BAEDERAS** DIAS: B 6 JUMBB ; Frocuro aíhonarso a lap tres Duacio*"oa. Do not piérda.
An interesting letter from Mr. del Valle Zeno
San Juan, June 4. 1920 Mr. Director of EL MUNDO, San Juan, Puerto Rico. My dear sir and friend: I have read in your enlightened newspaper of the 3rd an article on the problem of the . "matizado'' of the sugar cane and my discovery of the cause of this i disease, signed by several gentlemen, who in their almost totality form- - man the body of employees of the Es- - tación Experimental Insular. In that article twelve points are presented, for them of great value, by ! which these gentlemen deduce, that the cause of the ' * dulling ' ' is not "chemical-physiological' ' action as my discovery teaches, and yes uz " infectious microbe' '. It is not of much interest to the sugar makers for me to refute in the press each of these points, entering into scientific discussions that would be endless. I am going to give "indisputable practical proofs'' of the truth of my discovery to the Island and to the sugar world, and just today these proofs began on the grounds of the Island Experimental Station before a scientific commission composed mostly of the incredulous and presided over by the Acting Director of the Experimental Station, who is one of the signatories of the above-mentioned article. It is sensitive, on the other hand, that these signatories, in turn, could not show us that "infectious microbe" and that "transmitting agent" which carries the "infection" and make us sick with healthy canes before a scientific commission composed mostly of those on my side and presided over by the undersigned. I am grateful for these public manifestations of these gentlemen, which will only make my success greater. With thanks, Mr. Director, for the publication of these lines, I remain your dear friend, R. DEL VALLE ZENO, Civil Engineer and Agronomist. To our readers Because of the total exhaustion of our paper stock and the non-receipt of the large shipments pending at the N. Y. docks, we find ourselves in urgent need of a new paper supply, As our readers will see, the paper we are using in the present edition is of a different kind from the one we normally use, and although it is true that the stock we have of such paper would allow us to publish eight-page editions, we have had to discard such an attempt, since for printing on this kind of paper we can only use machines of limited circulation, which only have a capacity for four pages. We again ask for our readers' benevolence for this regrettable fault, which we hope will be corrected within a few days. THE SOCIALISTS WILL NOT JOIN THE REPUBLICANS (By telegraph) Bayamón, June 3, 1920. EL MUNDO, San Juan. Socialist Party informs it is completely false information published in some newspapers, saying socialists were invited by Iglesias in evening "Teatro Sisyphus" to join republicans in our triumph in Bayamón. We beg comrades isla not to give credence to similar information tending to divide socialists, more and more enthusiastic. If there is a town where socialists will never make a pact with Republicans, it is Bayamón. Island socialists will not join bourgeois parties. Speeches Muñoz proves it. José TORMES, President. MAY CARRY WEAPONS Have been authorized to hunt and carry arms, C. Dominguez Rubio, of Gua yama. and Jose Vidal Planellas, of Fajardo. AN APPOINTMENT The Governor approved the appointment of Don Rafael López Antongiorgi to interim Property Registrar of Humacao. SWORN COMPLAINTS Complaints have been sworn in the Municipal Court against Juan Siena Ortega, acometimiento con dxcvnstancias agravantes; Juan González, petty theft; Sixto Santiago, infracción ley de automóviles y- José Batista, Codito Cas tro y Andrés Batista, acometimiento y agresión con agravantes. 4 *; Müocipio de S. Juan, P. R. * SE NECESITAN sanios pan ei ¡ ' > Servido de Témptan Pública. Im < J IntarMados may* address te 4 < < ► ofidna dni Conrisíenede Mantel- < ' pal dn Sanidad y EéMBceBcto. Jéaé CL CAWBdTJXntA Cead- ' ; ' ' mida Maatefral^da BaaMnd y J
Six cases for violation of the prohibition law were held in Federal Court yesterday, among which was a minor named Gumersindo Lizardi, charged with having manufactured a still for distilling alcohol. This minor alleged before Judge Hamilton that he had fabricated said device for the purpose of raising money to be able to embark for the United States in order to enter a mechanics school in the metropolis. Judge Hamilton, after having asked him several questions, stated that he found him guilty of the crime of which Commissioner Savage charged him, but that he would be lenient with him, pan pass his sentence, in view of the circumstances of his age, and the purposes he had in manufacturing an apparatus which is prohibited by law. He imposed ten dollars umita and costs. He advised him never in his life to violate the Federal laws, as they are very severe. MONTEVIDEO WORKS IN FAVOR OF CHOCANO - In Montevideo signatures are being collected for a message to be addressed ; to don Garios Herren, president of Gua theme, to ask him for a grada in favor of the poet Jose Santos Chocano. HE CAN CARRY WEAPONS Don Manuel Cadierno, of San Juaa, has been authorized to hunt and carry weapons. NEW MUNICIPAL JUDGE The Governor appointed Joeé A. Hernández, judge of Patiltea. THE MONUMENT TO ZENEA Ifurntro distinguished azafro Dr. Cuevas Zoquein taro te ataaclá* do invftarnoo to the ti-"refié* M mo*"muío erected to the Mostoso poet etibaao Senes, act ine tawo effect M veinto day of last month in Havana.
Trial a la Curte Federal Rodriguez Serra at the Ateneo
Next Monday, Mr. Manuel Rodriguez Serra will give a lecture at the Ateneo, on the throbbing social problem. The lecturer will develop this complex throbbing issue, from several points of view: The aspects of the problem in the present time; the extreme radical tendencies; the example of what happened in Russia; the antagonisms of groups; the problem in Puerto Rico. Under these headings Mr. Bodriguez Serra will develop his lecture, touching on other particulars which are directly related to those mentioned above, and ending and synthesizing his lecture on the concept of "democracy". The presentation of the lecturer will be made by the president of the Section of Moral and Political Sciences, Mr. Emilio del Toro. GOOD DETECTIVES Four detectives have been arrested in New York for being accused of various robberies in the Central Railroad of that city. The profiteering policemen had previously served in that company.
The Tragedy of General Lord Kitchener's Death
The fourth anniversary of his death
Today, June 5th, is the fourth anniversary of the sinking by submarines of the English submarine "Hampshire", in which Lord Kitchener, Minister of War of Great Britain, had embarked for Russia to attend to matters of great importance in connection with the great European conflict. Lord Kitchener's purpose in going to Russia was to confer with the heads of the imperial government in order to obtain more effective cooperation from the Russian army and to discuss with the senior Muscovite military the plans for a general offensive by the Allied troops. When he was about to fulfill his patriotic duty, the explosion of a torpedo put an end to his life in the abyss of the sea. To know the true relief of the great soldier's life, it is enough to read his memoirs, which have just been published in London under the modest title of "Life of Lord Kitchener". The most faithful, the most devoted of his collaborators, Sir'George Arthur, has compiled in three volumes all the orders, all the documents, all the known reports of his official and private acts, and in them he impartially outlines the life of the distinguished fighter, of the glorious ally. In this work the great taciturn of modern times appears as he was and some obscure points of the history of the world war are clarified. Kitchener first entered the War Office in England on the fifth day of August, nineteen hundred and fourteen, at the precise moment when the nation had declared a state of war against Germany. The pen was old and one could barely trace an Ama with it. When Kitchener signed with it, it rattled on the paper so loudly that the general muttered, "Good God, what a Ministry of War! She has neither soldiers nor feathers at her service ..... I don't know how we are going to make war." But there was Lord Kitchener. The great soldier worked with all his energies, and it was not long before the Ministry, which he found destitute of everything, had a good army and excellent pens to enable him to write all the official literature of the Ministry. But however hard Lord Kitchener might have worked, he would have achieved little, his success would have been meager, if he had not united clairvoyance to his great ability to lead men. Kitchener had the clairvoyance of a prophet. His eyes had the miraculous virtue of reading the future, and that quality of the great soldier stands out in all the documents relating to his life that have now been published. Kitchener was wonderfully accurate in predicting that the war would not last more than five years. In an interview he had with Charles Schwab, the Steel King of the United States, Kitchener told him: "This will be a long war, but it will not last more than five years. Will you undertake by a signed contract to guarantee that during that time the great steel works at Bethlehem will not leave your 'control'?" Kitchener foresaw the Dardanelles disaster.
Kitchener foresaw the Dardanelles disaster, and in all the instructions he gave during the course of the campaign, the following phrase stood out as a "leitmotiv": "If the fleet does not have the support of the land forces, it will be impossible to force the passage of the Dardanelles. Kitchener foresaw that the operations in the East would be a failure if the Allies were not prepared to spend their money in raising a large army there. From Greece he cabled his government back in November, nineteen hundred and fifteen, as follows: * As long as the Allies do not have at Sa Ionica four hundred thousand men on a war footing, we shall never succeed in what we have set out to do". It was Lord Kitchener who was the first to understand that King Constantine would not yield except by force to bring Greece into the war in favor of the Allies. And it was he who spoke to the sovereign in the language he could understand, in the language of firmness and energy. -What can I do," cried King Constantine, trembling, "if Germany threatens me with a million men? -You must not forget," answered Kitchener, "that England will have four million in the line of battle within a year. Kitchener anticipated the treachery of the Russian "debacle". In the year nineteen hundred and fifteen, with astonishing prophetic vision, he wrote to Mr. Millerand, who was then at the head of the French Ministry of War: "The situation in Russia is extremely alarming from any point of view: social, political, economic and military. The anarchist and revolutionary parties are not disarmed everywhere the hotbed of treason can be seen. The German influence, in spite of the efforts of Grand Duke Nicholas, continues to work on all social scales. The enemy's hold on the Scandinavian and Ottoman straits is so strong that it isolates Russia and prevents her from receiving, in exchange for her wheat exports, the imports of the articles she needs to live and to defend herself The feeling and sensation of this suffocation influences the morale of the people and the economic life of the nation. The Russian armament is insufficient. The situation. from the point of view of munitions, is crushing and almost hopeless." Kitchener predicted his death. And quite impressed by the gloomy presentiment, he, who never backed down, was tempted to postpone his trip to Russia, on the pretext that he would not be a welcome person there. But an imperious telegram from St. Petersburg forced him to leave. He left London by King's Cross station on the fourth of June, nineteen hundred and sixteen. At that moment something unusual happened. After having monedo in the car-va-eon. Kitchener went ashore again, and shaking the hand of Sir George A. Arthur, said: "Take good care of everything while I am away". As the train departed, he looked out of the window, which he had never done on any other occasion in his life when absent from his homeland, and gave a long look at his friends, the station and the city that was being left behind, as if to say goodbye to the store he was never to see again.
The Governor announces new registration days
The following additional registration days have been fixed by the General Superintendent of Elections. FIRST:-The inscriptions will be held from eight to twelve in the morning and from one to six in the afternoon on the following days and places: June 7, 8, 9, and 10.-Barrio Ensenada, in the old store, property of the Cen tral Guánica. SECOND.-These registrations shall not change or affect in any way the registrations previously fixed by the Board of Elections for said municipality, as established in Administrative Bulletin No. 162, promulgated by the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico on February 4, 1920. and shall be held at no expense to the Board of Elections or the Government of Puerto Rico THIRD:-The Local Board of Elections of the aforementioned municipality shall hold these additional registrations in accordance with the Law. at the places and on the dates herein expressed: but the photographers employed by the Insular Board of Elections may not be required to photograph electors at places and times other than those indicated in their contracts. Applications will be accepted and certificates of registration will be issued: but persons desiring to have their certificates of registration issued at such times and places will be required to furnish their own photographs. THE MAGAZINE "LAS ANTILLAS" Since the 25th of May last, an interesting magazine entitled "Las Antillas" has been published in Havana, which devotes special attention to the affairs of Cuba, Puerto Rico and Santo Domingo. Puerto Rico and Santo Domingo. The address and administration of the nne vo colleague, are at Tejadillo Street No 22, Havana INSCRIPTIONS IN COMERIO (By telegraph) Comerío, June, 4. EL MUNDO, San Juan. Entries for day 2: Unionists, 337; Socialis.Vs, 16; Republicans, 1. Total, 354. Entries day 3: Unionists, 505; Republicans. 3; Socialists, 11 Unionist majority, 481. THE CORRESPONDENT. Workers' Assembly in Gaguas In Caguas an important workers' assembly was held, and a meeting was also held in which the question of the next Fair to be held on the 25th, 26th and 27th of this month in Bayamon was discussed at length. Mr. Angel Nuñez, Mr. Andres Rodriguez Vera and others spoke. Andrés Rodríguez Vera and others. Two committees were formed: one of ladies and another of caba lleros to take charge of the industries and manufactures to take them to the Fair. The "Federación Portorriqueña del Trabajo" appointed a commission of 6 delegates to attend the convention to be held in Bayamón, during the days of the Fair. The Commission is composed of three men and three women. Mr. Ramón León, an enthusiastic element of that city, presided over the assembly. A DECREASE IN THE PRICE OF FOOTWEAR IS FORECASTED The price of footwear will go down during the coming winter, according to what Mr. Edward A. Brand has just declared before the Senate Committee. It is founded on the decline which has begun in the prices of hides and skins. The reduction in footwear will not be effected immediately, because there are many quantities manufactured at high prices. AN APPOINTMENT The Governor approved the appointment of Don Pascasio Fajardo for interim justice of the peace of Mayaguez, for the duration of the leave of absence granted to the proprietary judge. NO PARDONS The Governor has denied the requests for pardon presented by inmates Pascasio Medina and Hilario Agosto. "The MONTEVIDEO'' from Colon, Panama, will arrive in this port from the 7th to the 9th of this month.
Steamer "TUWETANKA" Will be dispatched around the 10th. We invite requests for berths for New Orleans or New York, with preference to the former. Besosa & Stebbins, Sues. Phone 301, Totean 33.