ELM1NDO
j ■; t 8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester,,$4.00 One year. $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 ' Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING NEWSPAPER, "
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
■ I SAW PUERT0 i
Art "t oetubar A "IT-"a"- rt tte Fort Oto- W Rico- By crtw ot O" Praidt. A. A B-ri-u
^a "mr qate te te te títeeeteA Ateflte OteRúteC, fteterorj B A A A W a te " P "os Ottoe es Jia. Pm. bí^ DbíIU - "f iwnri) ni" A"" tí SBMh & 1ST"
I SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 25. OF 1420.
The "Bolslievikisnio" in Italy.
M The workers have seized the factories and forced the cash boxes - Thousands of women and children stand before the guns of the troops.
THE government of Italy has entered into negotiations with the General Industrial Conference, with the purpose of seeing how an agreement can be reached in view of the bellicose attitude of the workers, who have already seized the metallurgical factories of almost the whole of Italy. The Socialist group in Parliament also held an interview with the directors of the General Confederation of Workers, at which the workers' elements adopted a general policy in regard to the abnormal situation in Italian industry. It is estimated that about four hundred of the most important metallurgical centers of Italy are occupied by the mechanics and workers, and it is feared that the movement will also spread, even to the southern extremity of the Peninsula. The Government has taken preventive measures for the maintenance of order, so that it will not be taken by surprise by the announced general offensive with anger all industries. The manufacturers have declared that the wage increase requested by the five hundred thousand metal workers, represents for them a burden of one billion lire, which they are not willing to suffer. At the Conference the singular detail was brought out that Italy pays coal at prices sixteen times more expensive than before the war. Britain, for example, receives coal - 1 - Dynamite bombs explode in several towns (POB CABLE ENGLISH) WASHINGTON, September 24.-The head of the Police Investigation Bureau, Mr. Flynn, has received hundreds of anonymous letters in which anarchists threaten to proceed to place bombs and other explosive materials in the main towns of the Republic, if the agitators who are in prison are not immediately released. In the anonymous letters the non-extendable term of 48 hours is given, after which -they add- the threat will be carried out. One More Strike MADRID, September 24. -All the personnel of the Bank of Spain have gone on strike.
i at prices three and a half times higher i- than before the conflict; United States, r three times also; ^rance, six, / Alei many, eleven. It turns out, then, that foreign pro- - daction is replacing - Italian production. The steel worked, manufactured in France, has a better market than Italian products. The same steel made in Englate- . rra costs less than that which can be pro- . duced in Italy, even without yielding any profit i THE FANTASY OF " BOLSHEVI KISMO: Des members of the Ministry have . headed for Milan in the hope that : the General Industrial Conference will hear 11 their indications. In this case, it is believed > ■ that the agitation will be terminated, -- and that the workers will desist from occupying ¡■ the factories of the Peninsula. If, on the 1 1 1 contrary, the Conference does not tend to the . i advice of the Government, it is predicted that i' the situation will be prolonged indefinitely with much more serious consequences. -! The strikers learned that the police were intending to enter the factories occupied by the workers, and they sounded the alarm by means of whistles and sirens. Imme- , diately, a large crowd of . ■ women and children rushed upon the , - - factories, in order to defend, together 5 - with the men, those places. This i ■ indicates that the strikers have the pro i p oint to defend themselves, by placing as a parapet the women and children, from any attack by the police Every night armored cars and cyclists patrol the streets. Numerous machine guns have been placed in strategic places, and sometimes fired on onlookers. The police are constantly guarding the neighborhoods of the population and are ready for any eventuality. The strikers, by virtue of this activity, have felt that a chance attack is being prepared, and have therefore illuminated the outside of the factories with large torches. The police, however, have stated that they will not attack the strikers, and that their work is simply limited to preventing a surprise attack. The banks of the city are rigorously guarded, and their Directors are armed with rifles A dispatch received by the newspaper "La Tribuna'', says that in some factories of Turin the workers have forced the safes, in order to obtain the money which they claim to be owed to them. In the factory of the famous "Fiat" automobiles the strikers penetrated, taking with them important documents and correspondence. - One hundred and forty-nine factories in Turin are in the hands of the strikers.
HOT E LPAL ACE ? OFFERS: < "Lunch - Dance" i AT THE ROOF-GARDEN Every Sunday from 7 to 12 P. M. " PASSING RESERVATIONS CALL ! THOSE WHO DO NOT RESERVE A TABLE, AND THE HOTEL KITCHEN. i WILL NOT BE ENTITLED TO THE RAW F " $2.50 PER COVER. " RESERVE YOUR TABLE IN ADVANCE |
/MY M -' ' * Today Saturday Today J Pre ec i i i! m us ai 1* favorite Norma Talmadge - ¡ ®h beautiful drama 1 Under Contract : \ Manana Domingo ¡ El P" actor Japoaés SESUE HAYAKAW; d ORodMMte drama ■ - sentimeatal Temple of > I Twilight i ÍÍS Current Prices ; X.
। ^^onzále2^'acííi^C<^ = ^
l Still going cheap OFFERS: GENTLEMEN'S WATER COATS: from $12.50, $15 and $25 to $10, $12 and $20. GENUINE "PALM-BEACH" SUITS: from $14, $16.50 and $18 to $11.90. $13.50 and $14.40. s KNITTED AND PLAIN SILK HALVES: from $1, $1.25 and $1.50 to $0.74, $0.89 and $0.98 par. PLUS: FOOTWEAR OF ALL KINDS: PERFUMERY: UNDERWEAR: HOUSEWEAR AND OTHER CONSIDERABLE DISCOUNTS !!! Take advantage of Ganga'S Gonzalez Padin Co. Inc.
Exciting des- : podida to the battleship "Alfonso XIII".
The Irish con- ; tinue the fight for । ' their independence.
Millerand triumphs í easily over j all rivals 8 (BY ENGLISH CABLE) . PARIS, Sept. 24.-The Senators and Representatives of the nation, meeting in session, cozjfinta. designated Mr. MíHemnd, head of the Government, as the official candidate for President of the Republic. Better than an election, the act turned out to be a proclamation, for it was almost unanimous. The cereE.'3Ena= for the definitive election took place this morning at Versailles, with extraortinsna so- . len aidid and before ahrainador gerTtin THE POLITICAL SITUATION IS VERY COMPLICATED PARIS, September 24 -Since the end of the Versailles Congress, at which the official candidacy of M. MiLerand was proclaimed. MiLerand. the epinion. is very worried, because the political gitm ation is niu.y coempiicacioMs Among the candidates who a.spirated to replace M Deschantí. some of them, cottñ Jomoart, Raúl Perotó León i Bougeois. Ribot. Pans and Georges Ley-i gnes. are waging a noisy political cimpa- i! political battle. ' The state of affairs is so a^re-.-.-.- ... that it is feared that your successor to Míl'rrand will be forced to form a Government with the pers-inaMite poEti- ? cialities of the Republic. SPAIN PROMOTES MILITARY AVIATION MADRID, September 24-The Minister of War has ordered the rapid training of observer pilots, as well as that of aerial bomb throwers. For this reason, a Royal Decree has been published for the creation of schools in fifteen important points of the territory of the Peninsula A PRESIDENT WITH APPENDICTTIS I CIUDAD MEJICO, September 24.-The provisional president of the Republic, Mr. De la Huerta, suffers an attack of appendicitis, for which the doctors have decided, after a long consultation, to operate on him today. General Obregón is not separated for a moment from the patient's milk. I ! MONTEVIDEO-The Socialist Congress has agreed to adhere to the Moscow International Conference on the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and to the Moscow International Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).The former Kaiser Wilhelm of HohcnaoQcrn handed over to the authorities a hospital built by you as a token of gratitude for having allowed the Netherlands to allow you to take refuge in the menBu* to preserve your stomach, liver and intestines! ' ns of Life of Dr. Roas. I I H-bbM 1 : I I I ! I I I I 1 ! ! I 11 I I I I 1 ! ¡ PiMta de roponsto for rqpaBer ;; ; ¡¡ ' and reeoBstruir so cate regí dude - - - - ra" aa aorñMi machine, as- I d : ■■i ftmñgiafq, mtadographer, mal- * i ' tígzafa namendorog ote. Mari uí ros campetautea * ' '! OJEDA BROS. . : : : Sam Jose Hat A Rea Jsaa. ' J I I! I "KI IIIHI HIM mint 1 1
u i! <BY ENGLISH CABLE) ! NEW YOK September 24. -Yesterday i afternoon the battleship ~ A) ¡ fenso Rui* sailed from this port, bound for El Ferrol (Spain), which was given an enthusiastic ' send-off by many thousands of American families, An immense crowd filled the entire area of Battery Place and Sandy Hook Beach, from all the thousands of people who had gathered there gave a rousing cheer and thunderous cheers to the Spanish sailors. 1 In consul general Mr. Berea, and the ' Festivities Commissions accompanied the i "Alfonso XHI" until it was lost on the horizon. THE CYCLONE BIFURCATES WITHOUT MAKING MUCH NOISE j NEW ORLEANS, September 24.- The hurricane, after entering some States, lost its intensity 1 1 a few hours after it was lost ' north of the Mississippi basin. The damage it has done is, for this reason, very slight. The "Weather Bureau" considers the serious danger with which the cyclone was threatening the cyclone I DESCHANEL CONTINUES IN CRITICAL STATE i PARIS, Sept. 24 - The former President of the Republic, Mr. Deschanel, showed signs of intense depression and marked agitation during the day. The former President of the Republic, Mr. Deschanel, showed signs of intense dejection and marked agitation during the scrutiny held in the presence of the most eminent men of France at the Congress of Versailles । As soon as the Congress had finished its proceedings, Mr. Deschanel left for the Château d'Aix-les-Bains, accompanied by his wife and several relatives. . I THE WAR REMAINS IN EASTERN EUROPE ¡ AMSTERDAM, September 24.-With unbounded ferocity, the Poles and Lithuanians have resumed fighting on the battlefields: Poles and Lithuanians, who have already had horrible clashes, in which they have killed each other in hand-to-hand fighting, t The Lithuanians are operating with powerful ( "tanks", to which German pro- ( cadence is attributed, for which reason the Supreme Board of the Peace Council has ordered an investigation to be made, with the purpose of purging the Polish and Lithuanians, who have already had horrible clashes, in which they have killed each other in hand-to-hand fighting, t The political situation is becoming ever closer! MADRID, September 24-The King of Spain, Mr. Alfonso XIII, and the head of the Government, Mr. Eduardo Dato, discuss whether or not the feared dissolution of the Cortes is convenient for the country. ' IF King is determined to confront the seriousness of any political event that may occur, without the need to resort to such a grave resolution GREAT ECONOMY You get it by using the FISK RED TOP rubber, which is guaranteed for 5,000 miles, but is exceeded by this mileage. Have you noticed how many cars use FISK [ HKD TOP tires? Do you want to know the reason why so many people prefer them? Buy one, put it on your car and in time it will tell you why. THE FISK TIRE 8T0KE ADRIAN NEUON Distributor AdvA ¡ It plies and lines buttons. A CARAZO, Bran St. 72. < - . . .
(FOR ENGLISH CABLE) . LONDON.-Ha. hzhido numerous . killed, wounded and r< radius in Triawl da. The war without quartti. continues without > interruption for the independence of ■ the island. ' . BERLIN.- Wirth, Minister of Ha ' cicnda. forced the Government to agree to The national financial crisis, and threatened to resign immediately if it did not so verin. 'í PARIS, Sept. 24.-The ►' : National Assembly proclaimed Mr. MiLerand a- ■ I i' ■ ■tenth President of the Republic. The . í election was greeted with delirious ¡ ' applause. . J WASHINGTON - Mr. W C Harding, candidate for the presidency of the United States for the Republican party, declared that the nation has been overly concerned with foreign problems. Mr. Harding referred to the intervention in the Irish affairs. 1 MADRID.-Lmr staüealistas les ■ socialises prepare lists of surrender -.tos for the next etecrione?. I -The King will return on the first of October ... . i -The Head of Government, Mr. Dato, ; delayed his arrival, on account of a railway ocrideute. After meeting the Council, he will issue an important unofficial note. In any case, the crisis is expected. The Monarch ' contra- . i rio to the dissolution of Parliament. TRUCK "FEDERAL" I DE 1 TON. í Equipped with air tires and own elé> r trico alum do for GUA ¡ GUA or COLMADO. We offer it ready for delivery on the 28th day of the current month of September, i.e. on the arrival of the steamer "Helen". I! 1 We also offer a 1 FEDERAL 3 12 Ton. I with solid rubbers which 5 we are to receive for í said Vessel. ? i 1 BORINQUEN TRADING CORPORATION EDIFICIO BELAVAL 1 Tanca No. 2 - - TeL 1104 Garage Stop 17. Santuree SAN JUAN, P. R. El Centavo Escolar ! Miss Mercedes Solá. túrrete ña of the "Centavo Escotar", of Su Juan, begs us public C that next Tuesday, da 28. the ''One Rialto" will donate the prcdacte of all the . The ladies that eompeMn tí Cemsté; hope that our public second them > generous feelings of the sedans Bruno and Gonzalez, since dtí onq, cooperating coa his amatante in benedñe of the poor children. The Asoriarión "Centavo Escotar'* uo counts on Jos ir curen audeiautau pan sustain tas comedme during d csao, so tí pequedu "bolo individual will help him a mnrite pan seguir naHL zando su aritíte flJaataiptca. i--'"' " i-5^^- "
NUMBER 4%.
The sugar economic crisis ¡I
Fie de tresceodeirtal igportncie le reaaiún que eelekram ee la necke del 10, las hiceadedoe. buquerus. congressmen and journalists of Cube TX- , ... ...
Of great importance to the economic interests of Cuba (and of Puerta Rico) was the banquet held at the initiative of the United Sales Committee and the Cuban Sugar Union, because of the patriotic and eloquent phrases poured out during the tErém-g. and that ewwha. month of people automad a". The first to take the floor was Dr. Méndez Guedes, president of the Asociacióu. The first to speak was Dr. Mendez Guedes, president of the Association, who said that he thanked the conference and added that Cuba hopes that bankers and congressmen from Cuba and Puerto Rico will be able to join him. that Cuba hopes that bankers and congre 1 sists will save it from the situation in which it currently finds itself, due to the crisis that its main m- 1 Don Jasé Marimón 'lama la atenciiwn ; acere" of organizing the defense of the sugar deroches, and deriara q^e je " should go before whoever corresponds, to, with all right, all respect and esnaderadón. The problem is certainly not the responsibility of the producers, but of the agiotists who are coming in. The producers are certainly not responsible for the problem, but the agribusinessmen who come at the expense of the routine producers. 1 He referred to the creation of the --Sugar Cleaning House ' ' ceno the ínstifa¡nurón that in the porvrar has to save the ' producers of all speculation by psrte of tos agictrtas strangers, that only- : lo They have to deisúr and aproTeeitarse of the stuaejor of Cuba, to manage to its ■jutojo the market, with serious damage and ■ peí jiiiC'? enerme of ios interese* ar-r-re-rera. ' í Next, he deals you problem* eon the । ■ competition that all rotsmoeem him in , lo® most imprrtant financial matters. He was given a thunderous round of applause and the most effusive congratulations from all those present at the meeting, n The next speaker was Fernán do Sánchez de Fnentes. He regrets that the Bank projected by the "Asocia ' II ción de Hacerriados y Colones has not been constituted^ He finds the solution to the crisis in the Bank of Issue, which, he says, does not have the necessary resources. - He says, "not a competitor, but a guarantee that the other banks will be able to ¡rertinrr^r- pid" ; The cooperation of Congress and advocates the enactment of a law szlTad-o-o-ra_ He says. that. without soSdarad. there can be no homeland: that a moviinieiito in fail 1
He says. that a movement in the interests of Cuba must be successful, and that what is needed is to organize it. He asks that a mamñest.0.. be made known, expressing that all that is rearming is a work of defense and that a circular be sent to all i®* ¿ñoños de ingenios, recommending that -- - .- z2Íra ^ y ~ "nrtsEido that he who does not a.spire to win.., The summary summary was given by Dr. Ezmóu J. Martinez, who, once again, said that the Committee of V "nh*s de nzñcir in Cuba would be enlarged with a representation of all the pciftire leaders and representatives of the press, whose nt'mhramezrt.Bs are baran "pc'rtunammte The 0011 upuusal of the angiéa pecodico The Times" ' cure® a cablegram of five thousand palacras, to be published cu ei refer ..do periodic' o. and in which informs. are concretized all itos details of to current srtuaaóE axu'carera of Cubu. THE COBEESPONSAL. H j baña... September 11.... Mrs. Mey 3r arrived and reopened her Cabinet. Upon her return from her trip to Cuba and the Uuídox. States, she advises her £"31 TrnniLLLiff^ lísa and valuable"" clientele, that she is once again at the source of her e-nuieije-e-nor Cabinet, Meyer, trying to do everything possible to provide the city of Saa Juan with an office of this kind, in the most modern style, has set up a new office at 12 Saa J. Street, Saa J.?sé number twelve, in 1c* first floor of the same edifim® er- which is insta- all you Hotel Central, and which faces the Spanish Casino, where it is offered in s®* aervimos- profesácnales, to all its customers amerícane* and p-rt-orriqu-eños The latest invention Felix Lopez Jewelry has just received the most perfect machines to make any crystal of mirrors, in less than 1 0 minutes. Take advantage of the rs' duction of time and cost. San Francisco 32 - San Juan. Advt.
5 11 rggw II
ME. DEADEB Exirtencaa Sizes ' %", metric and | BU-tCUá ' Sclicite price* | SCS. DE L VTÜAMSL ñ ! CIA. San Juan
l l PAYMENT ENVELOPES HAVE ARRIVED. |¡ [ LETTER ENVELOPES HAVE ARRIVED. j ► ! ! 4"0 SHEET REAM PAPER ARRIVED. I ! FOR THE DETAIL ¡ ¡ ¡ [ REMEMBER OUR EXCELLENT "SIGNET'' INK OF, ¡ ! ! ALL COLORS AND FOR FOUNTAIN PENS. AND REMEMBER THE UNALTERABLE WHITE PASTE : ¡ ¡ "LEPAGE". GREAT WHOLESALE DISCOUNTS. [ ' ! SCHOOL BOOKS AND PENCIL PENS. I I FOUNTAIN PENS. PAPER FOR MACHIMLLA. [ CARBON PAPER. MACHINERY TAPES. |j ! you will find all this in good quality and cheap at the house of good printers.
ill [cTANMRnl SIMMFtetHi [énSSSñl H Wirts - 18000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000