the world
\ . I 6 pages 3 ctvs. Semester. 14.01 A afio.
। ~ Offices Stavotior Sprouts YES ! Tai. "33 P. O. Box 34S i
[MARIO DE LA MARAÑA
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
i.- . 44. ; AHO 11
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO J - i t
fl RaginMo of f. R, to the matograda Captain Parra
Xas companies that compose the "Be- > gfafcihiito do Puerto Rico" have the purpose d* to dedicate an offering to ¡ mafrjprado ^capitán Pedro Juan Parra | Capó, depositing on his tomb in I Ponce, Váriá" artificial wreaths. । We have been informed that it is probable that one of the Companies will visit the city carrying the last tribute to their beloved Chief. | In case one of the entire organization cannot go, we are told, the soldiers will appoint a committee from among their own ranks, to carry out the will of all. - Each of the companies intends to send a wreath. XA TRAVIESO FAMILY In the impossibility of corresponding personally to the numerous friends; qn these days of mourning and sadness' for the TRAVIESO Family, they have di rigid to my relatives and to the one who suscri- ' pe to express to us their sympathy and for Calecemos with phrases of condolence, re- 1 curro to this means to express to all ¡ and to each one of our friends, as well co- i mo to the Press of the Island, our sensflís sin- ' '
r ■ 1 'T. 1 ' WmLj prizes ,/ Id Meláis ti lo Feria
San Juan, May 22, 1920 ¡ 9t. don J- W. Blanco, Br, of the American Red te* Chapter. w softer our: !  A diploma should be awarded to C. O. Lord and Co. for their exhibition of the "Delco Light" and "Overland" automobiles. Finlay Waymounth and Lee is awarded the corresponding diploma for its magnificent display of "Boyal" typewriters, "Bnnoflghs" typewriters, "Boyal" typewriters, "Bnnoflghs" typewriters and "Bnnoflghs" typewriters. I would like to make the special recommendation that a Diploma be awarded to Mr. Angel Oliveras for the ingenuity he has displayed in the way he has displayed in the way he has used the Weictes of the Finlay Waymounth and Lee hardware store. It is fitting that Satomi * should also be awarded in favor of the firm of Merino Rodrigues and Bno. for their display of EByrqtotih and sanitary effects. ItKs'seloñM tee and O'Neill are me rocadores of Diploma for the useful equi pee pArá teqfltale* etc., which have prei -M fetafislfirs* Beldades and Garcia pro A, .-a. - - - . - - - - - Alamt'Miypcaptured L* police of Santurce captured yesterday Ad dawn, tti the house of Ramon Cellato, an atesbique, at moments when qne dato was mmab* in the making of the precious nq0dd . ' Fuérononle occupied, also, to Collazo, ceatro gatopqs of rum, half a pipe of and tari** accessories, necessary pars'la preparation of alcoholic beverages / X* ■. xk^Ófim^TuE Atajo THUAQV^ir^Y PRONTO M.' "a la íte figure ti ' wwmlM y.***" <MA¿te- áu^Mn^ cuno ya tedon Ab- ¿ mzigtatat" ^taqgram of > Ite Wj? temí s?. -w-- ■ - ^¿^Bós tetetanos \ ■ \í . *■ -
i cede them free Diploma for their exhibition of Dental Instruments and hospital equipment. Mr. Elpidio Batista deserves a Diploma for his work in dental mechanics, which we have considered to be of great merit. Mr. Elpidio Batista deserves a Diploma for his exhibition of Agricultural Implements. Mr. Herbert W. Brown also deserves a diploma for his exhibition of "American" adding machines and other effects. It is undisputed the diploma in favor of The National Cash Register Co., for its exhibition of ' ' ' National ' ' cash register machines. For Messrs. Gonzalez Padin and Co., we request a Diploma for the exhibition of their superior "Remington" typewriters, steel office furniture and files, "Y and E" brand and loose-leaf books for accounting. We ask for a Diploma in favor of López Villamil and Co. for the presentation of the "Splittdorff" magnets. . . Mr. Besosa and Mr. Stebbins Sucr. deserve a Diploma for the exhibition of the recommended "Corona" typewriters, check and glue/cartoon machines. The Singer Sewing Machine Co. has been recognized for the award of a diploma for its "Singer" sewing machines. The exhibit of Messrs. itacn. of J. Clivillés and Co., consisting of "Overseas" electric plant and electric water heaters and "Woodstock" typewriters, is worthy of a Diploma. It is appropriate that a Diploma be granted to Mr. Sanchez Morales and Co. for their "Criolla" exhibition of the "Victor" phonograph. Don Rafael Margaríd* should be awarded a Diploma for his excellent furniture manufactured in the country. . The sefiores Sues, dq Abarca are aeree dores to Diploma for the excellent exhibition of the electric plants^ and mo tores "Fairbanks and Morse", pumps "Kttnq" and c "rr "ás "DuXbaX". The Diploma is due to Messrs. P. Pan Day and OOu, for the distribution of 'AeoUan' pianolas, 'Globo Wernicleó?' office furniture, 'Monarch' typewriters, and 'HaU Marvin' cash drawers. "TwmTrfáp rocoa|(MftNnoe IRplepta in favor of les sÚÍomb Rach, Porídta and Oo^ by snaxhibiciáajkd ' 'Antqpifae' Fta" oí aefter J. IR Ronret roeSeMnftambe D^píhm,i a de atesta two fooiilbfos "Mtíra" exhibiting. OosMÚdefliinMi ^Rbíoma a la traps Me. Abey and Morgan for their "Nattenal Fsrlmai Seals" apparatus, which are very useful. Al ssiep S"- A. getesWi de^e etorgársaie Diploma per a* eoqpulcMa of crwtiiii w ■fcwr
IFnbínhed andT ¿utribvfd andar periait (No, 801)-temiroji Aet of octobor 0, 1917. on Alo at lio Post Ofáee of Sea JaSa, HM Rico By order of the Pr-idaw*. a e Rorlmon. PeoO-Mr O-S^a
! at A* Pea* (Mee ■" Sea toan. Porta Riaa. (United I Stataa et Swariyo) endar too Act of march *. I8TO [
i < ■ ; ■ - A judgment for ten thousand dollars rosuefto in the Federal 0.
Yesterday morning began ce- । lebrating in Federal Court the case I of Luis Camacho Garcia v. Jesus Rodriguez, for 'damages. | The plaintiff alleges that back on October 31, 1919, at the new night, while he was on duty as an island policeman at the corner of Tanca and Fortaleza Streets, he was badly damaged by the defendant's automobile, in such a way that he was unable to continue rendering his services; he estimates that the damages caused amount to $30,000, and asks the Court for a judgment in his favor for the aforementioned sum. The entire day of yesterday's trial was in evidence, several eyewitnesses having testified. The plaintiff is represented by the law firm of Francis and de la Haba, and the defendant, Chas. Hartzell. At 6 o'clock in the evening, the Jury of the : Federal Court returned a verdict of , $10,000 in favor of the former policeman. । tions of deep gratitude, reite- ! rándoles them my most sincere friendship, San Juan, May 28, 1920. Martin TRAVIESO
Important adducts from the French Chamber of Commerce.
Numerous Fegid pnsianerbs from Russia.-Interpelaciohés concerning the German inoemoization X i
The Chamber of Deputies ratified the Treaty of peace which was stipulated at Saint Germain. The President, of the Chamber, Mr. Pe- : ret, in opening the session, emphasized ; the sentiment produced by the ac- ; cident suffered by Mr. Deschanel, a , who assured the great sympathies : felt by the national representation : for his illustrious pempu". < . In loiprógima sost of the Chamber will be made interpellations -a poopésito of the conference vetiMbáde tti'gythe. PARIS, -May 28.- The French citizen priteers who were in Russia i | as prísianeroa'dfe gueiTa and who have < si^o repatriated by the government of the ; Republic, have arrived today. | ; An enormous crowd, which Ies aguar-. The crowd, which was at the railroad station, cheered him incessantly. Mr. David, Under-Secretary of the Interior, welcomed them on behalf of the Government. PARIS, May 28.- *Mr. Millerand will reply today, Friday, to the questions which will be put to him in the Chamber of Deputies, concerning the fixing of the war indemnity to be paid by Germany. The President of the Government replies-', rá with some reservation, as fits neg- 1 elations have not yet been fully approved either by Germany or by the ¡ Allies.  José A. González, who had the representation in Puerto Rico of the Ame-. rcan Iron Products Co , firm with which he will work in the central offices. González, who is a teacher, has held positions of great trust in the Federal Government. For several years he was head of the Marine Bureau of the San Juan Customs Office.
(BY FRENCH CAÍ^E) , PARIS, May M. - In this capital and : in Lyon an enormous smuggling of currency, gold and pia- < : ta, which has been going on for some time with ' Wh a, has been discovered. The authorities have reduced to priJ sion numbers*^ people. ' < LONDON, nd^o 28.- The Peace Conference has invited the Berlin government to replace 'Corone^ Xylandec, delegate of the Commission set up to review the avdfco of the mines of the flhffo/ for not being persona ' grata . । ; - ' ' + ' ! ROME, may^ir- The. "viador Italian Ferrari, qdRm has hesitated .audacimen-: , te the trip átaseme Rome to Tokyo (ca- ; pital of Japan)j[has reached the pe-, ' ninsula of Kain^ ! ! LONDON, Am- 28.- The newspaper ■' "Le Journal" d^ce that the Conference' . of Ambassadors Pe has not only asked the Meman gobieota to withdraw at once the con*m Xylander, but also to dis- : 1 - - -A t | well to dis^o^ all its acts, {< ' by which the Berlin government shows -: : of UmBluta good faith. I' I The newspaper ^|>e Petit Parisién" j i announces that the Gpnference economics' ' ' . Franco-German will shortly put the co- j < ' triarte to áns respective governments of 1 . The results obtained so far, i < i , ! KÉTTY FIGbiftAS AT THE - -, CABtjrg OF PUERTO RICO , On Sunday evening, an artistic party will be held at *, i les MÜostes d^_fi|^iap ^ y^erto Rico. The "aMte' r óo<mÍÍ singing the beautiful ro- ; mam*, "la. Date del Brasil", making 'do the acdápaftaintanto of flute the co'nocido professor and coifipositer Rafael : Márquez, father. - The event will be attended by the chaste students of the pcúfeséra A Reggíani. iró* dare us to be a . ^beautiful party dq m which once . i again will put Heíty Figj^ras of re-, l l lieve his splendid faculties do can ' tanta, which augur him a brillantg, por-,, i vehif he determines, when he concludes : his stages, to 'embrace the career ar- ■ । tltticá - ' - , -r 7
- PARIS, May 28. - At the session held yesterday by the Academy of Sciences, the illustrious physician Mr. Daniel Berthelot gave an account of a sensational discovery, verified by Dr. Pech, who assures that the protection of those who operate with the terrible "X-rays", has been forever assured, without fear of any future dangers arising qiqgguia jcúsq;tie. Rt- móemPleáto consists in neutra- " lizing ultraviolet rays by the simultaneous application of infrared rays. PARIS, May 28.- ^¡1 ' Echo de Pa- * ris" gives for certain the news d^ that; the President of France will soon isolate himself completely $e Ips official business, retiring until the summer in ' a villa, to give himself up to absolute rest. The President's audiences have already been suspended. i The departure of Mr. Deschanel will take place on the 29th or 31st. It is believed that rather than to Rembouillet he will go to Beaupere, in the vicinity of Rennes, where he will enjoy the calm he needs. LONDON, May 28.- The Ccnferen- i <áa of Ambassadors has finished the ¡ examination of all rotating affairs : *1 Schleswigtx . It also dealt with the fame in which the proceeds of the sale of the, war material not destroyed potj Germany is to be used and distributed . " This important matter will be arranged-1 do ultimately of acted with ta CoMission of -Rapatataaaeñrr -- - - - - ■ 7 - ^-.1 THE "BARCELONA" ¡ / ' The consignee house "Pinillos Iz- . quierdo and Co.", awaits the arrival today) to San Juan of the steamship ' 'Barco- ' lona", which comes from Spain, " The "Barcelona" will probably leave tomorrow for the other ports on its route! .-,-,- DANCE AT CAPE ROJO : ! Tomorrow a dance of confidence will be held at the Casino of ; Cabe Rojo, which will begin to te* nnévé Be" the ñoéfie. j
- ~ f -■ The strike peijuicios. On sugar shipments.
I pneden pneden to warm, with more or less exáctdtnd, the enormous damage that i ta ÍHWld? 1 de márinqs ? e^T. causing j to these industries, by romqr^ ^^país! in SMMral. te su j. Íri4$ í® 1 shipments of sugar, p se com ; 1 paran íós that sé are taking place : at present, with that which took place' during the past month of April. I The shipments of sugar during the first four months of the month of April amounted to a total of 1 million tons, while the corresponding shipments during the month of April amounted to tons. - Afin puande the jinglo jie tas embar-1 ■ qnte^db sugar qé -resaltara á pérdi- ¡ das passes l¿s stab^iinrm, despite J r that Mu prisoners jf^M^coostanf enteca . the itateado, tM^OeS prodncteros and cp- , uí|tÁteteé juL^ijggMi; paBda a' W azA . cam pará v^^^Sra'''lps Pfeciea dheo tiauMta acnm&A W mMzeeMb do te' a" t mona passed it.ssugar moocubed so - r tnrWlli T doÍMHM,fatalM lo huuigf" b potato 'which ^rytúcMrta ha". eapd^ b cutali indhii llgMi. i'pact Amm <oSOO da sell £¿¡6 ptuciM of the aom$¿ b IO. ; JT , íós émagícquM do antear have sufifim'une rejuertte de efefoonta atil ' rimperarlta. cqp too baoMta daí tees aattcisr loe otebUrqneq ' do ir éeeeeha á<4éü are ' *MIM4n <m lab co "recp¿n*mitee a 1 la' tentaba antaqiar pare oate-^RKa Ral ' afta. / ' ' ' " - nyiiHi te awa that ácttbjgi * uoImK mmiÍmmrmm aapRMIiM^ ptSR4ÍÍÍÍB ÉrtiNd do^teiiirarll^ ■ - - - . -; . - '
The small shipments in the past year were caused by the abnormal conditions that were caused by the difficulties of the import system. Ros embarqué* were under. i the "con'ról" of the gebieriio, and were effected-i : ban with teda laorapidée that allowed ¡ i the space that oftecfaa Ms companies ¡ j shipping companies in their ships-o ul government in Matocos. * i the áñq of 1918* under conditions i ¡ ¡ desquerrá? were drinking ümbmuilBRaTa es- f VENDEÜÓRfS ¡ Am it), - A?flvnnK 0Beaxvsr wje U wm círSMRacríaii gáM qMi taMtMVa this Üp&'í Wtoi, ? Wy* j >^rteii l nV .Na^MMiotadMliiMK of m - WsWíl****^' *
t, this time 231,000 ton* of sugar. ' In ti year 1917 the total lo* eipbarj ques, aí 'ttSiiñüar the qies of May, came * to 303;2ft tons. : that'about to miffed of ; the cosétíia*^kárina l^fsido pmmh in í movement so far. Only about fifty thousand tons had been shipped in the first half of February. DéíüTeñI toncas, particularly dúranto te ttti- ¡ fk fifteenqRjdel wya^mñj^y in te Teqdiarquq* month | pbríl, lo*,*tab*rqups atat^ti mi nuóvc impulse Jtár ti progrejére aitwimiu already, aubqto some. Rr Mb "eatnM, whose prudqcdón hl séptañí*' a te .producción ocgiiuuia,' oMtídtastafta monandp until |nni* o jtüfl^' ' - - Chai taños "tas aíjpsrenfs, * á "ñcar of the island "dAn crowded. Loé prsénrts i tes want to give salidfi to sqs zafir aw, not aataasenta pan tas pzqciias qú* *s safifin -paying for the artf¿i&¿*sino £of íá faite dW mzyot q*ocio pora ti ahqacenajs. ' "Xa flsñ Jñsn there are mile* di atheists, and in otate adaaacmass and patetas 4a te island as many other müa* ready for qoébtaqnn -tetammotit* per te Insiga. Tran do Ma/ r reiyaiaa ds R beats ya Mm rarra fie his taímate fita have finished, te* caeectas: te '^íneva aortica", the "Blata" and te "WniMlfl". ios two iteWta *oiisr?n la ptseanta atetaba iMte sacs M*t fifi* tetante la No as has been able Jatermtimr ti date qnq teRMMte "wi* te omsad^t la Atateh-"fiteSa" M M teib te te nía ÍÉMÍi Mfwhtetetitate'. Rateóte te riwihe tetala Mdo par' jufittada'^te la ateqm eanea . £ '■ M '' : -5' - ; '¿ .
SATURDAY MAY 29, 1920. j
Message from the Supreme Pontiff to the French President.
(For French Cable) ROME May 28.- The accident su- : frido by Mr. Deschanel has produced ■ intense impression at the Vatican. The Rapa and the Cardinal Secretary of State have addressed eloquent messages to the President of the French Republic, congratulating him on his recovery. ORDER IS RESTORED IN MADRID MADRID, May 23. - Due to the intervention of the Government, which held frequent exchanges of views with the workers in the bakeries, the bread dispute has been settled faithfully. í - : SUPPORT FOR THE STRIKE PARIS, May 28.- The congress of the . The National Federation of Civil Servants has decided to join the General Confederation of Workers, and has also agreed to vote the sum of two thousand francs for the victims of the movement.
NUMBER 396.
In a. serious mflo in Ponce resol- ' tan several injured.
(Telegraph) EL MUNDO. San Juan Today promoted riot t atieres '' Sul tona" ios tabaqueros Rosales, Diaz, Ortiz, Segarra. Zayas. Serrano. Colón, leaving wounded high factory employees Messrs. Landron. Ruiz. Bustamante, Mercado and Lugo Municipal Judge indicated bail each one for $500. Captain Hurtado, with police carbines, maintained order. Due to lack of paper, the local newspaper "Aguila" suspended publication until next week. The correspondent. LEURET'S CONFERENCE IN PONCE This evening will be held at the "Club Deportivo" of Ponce, a conference by the well-known Swiss explorer Dr. Maximo A. Leuret, who will speak about "Impressions and Adventures of a trip around the world". The event will be held under the auspices of the "Club Deportivo" and distinguished personalities of the city dti South.
More registration days fixed by the Governor
11 Governor has issued the following proclamation: ' 'The following additional registration days have been fixed by the Insular Board of Elections for the 1920 registrations in the municipalities of Río Grande, Utuado and Guayama, namely: I FIRST: Registration shall be held from 8 to 12:00 a.m. and from 1 to 6:00 p.m., on the following days and places in the above mentioned municipalities: CAMUY, June 2. - Barrio Quebraí da, at the house of Alberto Avila; June 3. - Barrio Quebrada, at the house of José Hernández Romero; June 4. - Barrio Santiago, at the house of Miguel Arrieta; June 5. Barrio Piedra Gorda, in the rural school; i June 6- Barrio Ciénega, in the rural school; June 7.- Barrio Abra-Honda, in the house of Miguel Arrieta; June A- Barrio Cibao, in the house of Agapito Matos; June 9.- Barrio Cibao, in the house of the Central "Soler", registering in the latter the voters of Cibao and Puertos. HATILLO. June 10, 11 and 12.- Ba rrio Bayaney, house of Juan Bautista Román, registering in this one the voters of the Barrios Bayaney and Aibonito NAGUABO. Together 14, IS. 18, 17, 18 and 19.- Barrios Peña pobre and Río Blanco, house of Rosendo Ríos, town called "Las Cuatro Caltas".
RIO GRANDE. June 12.- Barrio Guzmán Arriba, house of Facundo Pagár; Jumo 16.- Barrio Mameyes 2o., house of Jesús V. Rodríguez ¿^OTJAilp* Juigat Mtebte. ten. ta| leíate First, in ti building of the Cor- : te Municipal > GUAYAMA, June 14, 15. 16, 17, 18, 19 i and 2L in the building of the Carte Muni ■ cipat i SECOND: These registrations shall not change nor affect in any way the previous registrations set by the Insular Board of Elections for said municipfl", as established in Administrative Bulletin No. 162, promulgated by the Executive Secretary of Puerto Rico dated February 4, 1920, and shall be held at no expense to the Insular Board of Elections or the Government of Puerto Rico THIRD: The Local Boards of Elections of the aforementioned municipalities shall hold these aüictanal registrations in accordance with the Law. in the places and in the* arrows herein expressed; but the photographers employed by the Island Board of Elections may not be required to photograph voters in places and honors other than those indicated in their contracts. Requests will be accepted and registration certificates will be requested; but persons wishing to have their registration certificates issued on such dates and at such places will be required to furnish their own photos.
TO THE PUBLIC -
Under the auspices of the Chamber of Commerce, the Hotaño Club has organized a coffee house under the name of "Citizens Committee for Public Service" to help restore normal conditions in this community and to solicit the cooperation and assistance of all citizens in the accomplishment of this object. The Citizen's Committee* for Public Service hopes to accomplish its task without favoring or prejudicing the interests of the parties involved in the present conflict. In order to secure adequate quantities of food and other necessities for Saa Juan and the island, the Citizens' Committee for Public Service requests the cooperation of all concerned.
■ i pecialmeute of the merchants "(and other perseas a Quienes veni ga consigned cargo which at the ac- - tuality have merchandise^ at the i docks, lifting these immedia tamente in order that *e levan ■ te the embargo which weighs on the i cargo of merchandise to the island. > The said Committee has established its office in the premises of the Chamber of Commerce, Tetuan Street, corner of San Justo. i Merchants and other persons - who own trucks and wish to cooperate for the duration of the present ' situation are requested to communicate with the Committee as soon as possible. CaaiM m "jtititiK *m Santal Mun - L.< . .... -■■¡liiiAateta&taíiiirvWiii