THE WORLD
I "teatenm |
j Offices: Salvador Brau. 81 i Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345
DAILY NEWSPAPER OF THE TANGLE,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
| SAW RIAN. PtJHtTO RICO
YEAR ■ |
A "t "e "rteAer a 1117. - at the Poet QfSea of San Jmb."■" Bieo. By order of the Pi-id-L A. S. S. Bari--. Paet-aaMr 6- dp.
! Satered *- aecond e^M Matter, 2 1, 19 14, ■t the Post OfSee at Baa Joon. Porta Bico, (United States ef Aseeriea) nader the Aet of msreh 8. 1879.
SATURDAY, MARCH 27, 1920. <
NUMBER 343.
ük m IMímis" 4 vmhMs su nfalfaes.
(Mküi of Ib pteBa of N. Y.) i-, . Jeoeph Rimu, commissioner for fruit mapw, who has been a member of the "Society for Psychical Studies'' and has devoted himself for more than thirty years to the study of spiritualistic phenomena, made these stupendous statements: "Spiritualism is one of the greatest deceptions that the "mediums'' have invented to exploit the weak and gullible. Since the outbreak of the European war and the beginning of the slaughter on the battlefields, thousands of thousands of mothers, fathers, wives, girlfriends and girlfriends have been killed, fathers" wives, girlfriends and relatives of those who were deaths aeutberrm to spiritualism in their desven turp patp raimar the pains of the - eternal separation with the consolations offered by the communication with the "beyond ' Jxm "mediums" have diemn rúen the of the umvimiento and have been apro, Techada of the Situation to make ; bótate and easy business. I. "I wish to make it clear to those poor deceived people that there is not a single honest "medium" on the face of the earth. In order to save these people from deception, I offer one thousand dollars to any association in general, and in particular to the "Society of Investigations", as long as I am provided with honest and scientific proof that demonstrates the exalted nature of these spirits. "Ita same Eusapia Paladino, p ^ne came to the United States with i iríommdnrionr: of Lombroso. Bi. IncL FlaaamarqMf and Sir Oliver Lodf ge. who had/eunqpistadq a re^ ipataeiám jnaHaqaeionai as yasc-r , da* 3 pe ana impostor. When I tried e that aáe demonstrated Bus faculta f df i^pi lamlifndnlL duplicate euan- " M eíte bátate. he did not return, and mr; left for Europe without his being able to , tteunnat of anything- ? . "You unleash from that creíl failure aTespintumo dead forever. pen" the war has made him re msürcooenmsa revenge. Sir (Miver Lodge is the central figure in the ¡ limiimriim of spiritualism. The ¡ tec uro de k*" he endorsed Ensa-[ fehMro. and I have reason to caver phase if he was deceived that wd"'vqh "4 > "e "*®Laa Jtefiteenos about which' ■O-ba te-t"<io the belief cu the dgNTitiBuo never, have been proba ta" par a scientific anáiis". and the ¿batata par "tasto of the "■Mum? - have had to abandon r ¿i-negoem because they let" themselves see -i andana, which "aparaba a es-> tea pápenteles was that of the es. pfciloe " work with their anta -dniatan Eró era. d game of the Ttadsmm": when a perso¿a qwpñdn not allowed to be deceived, nanean to the etendagema sororri-3p-dt irn that the spirits do not res píMfaDi-psr autaguaítum between the : ¿tesada^* Htensnbaa in making Sd amiteit4eJmi tempt us, v they ^AAÍátaÁte* No, falsehood. te exist. e L WiMiimiLa flh'wrp* n*i pay arrest ¡ '^KtaamJMrfabte j Maria Car-t -yrSTOX square of the - df^Bn jNfiHMni Bn&aron in laj -- 1 . - i ' a . te*. "
- "I"■F inn iMuun south, | -- - -MBABQk - " " "ATI AS" S } ^E. '- :^mintaE a days 22 to 31 of : DEL MUELLE A LA LLE- ■ - ' ' ' CADA DEL VAPOR. 9-atan*!. * nonuAnan. sana*!. < nothing 2 MMnNNOS OF E2QU1AGA | ^■anum "*^ ■* - e*^ 1 - ^^tetaltL -* - r ' *-- - -
ra be exempted from contributions for ten years.
I View of an important application to the Public Service Commission . . i- ■ . At the Public Service Commission ■ blk-o "* held yesterday the hearing of 1, an important application, filed ,; ta "la by the Industrial - Cotton Company, to be exempted from the payment of taxes for a ¡t period of ten years . . F This company is engaged in the manufacture of mattresses, T-shirts and metallics, and alleges that it is a new industry in the country. The hearing was held before the Secretary. Ledo. Pablo Berga. J Representing the petitioning party was Ledo. Miguel Guerra Mon 1 dragon. Cntrikta it Hcires n h fmten mjican According to reports received at the Customs, has been surprised at the' i. border of Mexico, in terrí'.nrio of the United States ('nidos, a smuggling of hares that. by the inge- - nious of the procedure, deserves: the publieaeióni' l'n very elegant automobile was , used eomo means of transport, i The vehicle halda been built ¡ ¡"ad hoe". The gas tank, which was divided into two departments, provided an excellent place to carry the gas tank. > The authorities had 00:i- : .'¡as that the car was s*jspceh&s">... t l'q day they proceeded to search it, i finding in the place already indicated, i i i upa huge quantity ¿e cincho) ¡ t l'n such Méndez, Mexican, was rej ' dneido to prison. He was owner and ' "'chauffeur* of automórD aon- : rtzabandista. a k*qnrVMb*pr?fieesado by mfrae-l : eion to Di I>*y of National Prohibition- * Las Mta m tent Cute: ¡ - 4 - j ' By telegraph ■ ¡ I Ponce, March 26EI. Ml'NDO. i San -Juan. í Municipal court held । trial accused riot t'erm Gor-í do and during agricultural strike. ab_. solviemlo fifty-two and punishing six to $25. 75 and $90. Hato Tejas riot trial acquitted two and punished six with $50 fines. D. Virgilio Dávila' will be next Commissioner mun i- ¡ cipal instruction. j The Correspondent. ¡ EE THE VICTORY GARDEE. i On Monday will give its be-j nefieio performance the Palacios duet, so! applauded by our public inteli gente. If we judge from the program, -pie is varied, the performance promises' to be splendid. The Palacios duet wants to make us spend a good time of art before embarking for Cuba. DmACCIOM TO THE LAW OF ARBITRIES Ramon Velez and J. Rivera, quiejnes are accused of infringement ¡a the law of arbitrators, requested i an extension of 30 days paca prej Matar the exposure of the casn. and I read Ti item to 1 granted them onlyI mind 15. in attention to the fact that already - is cemeluído the Á *record". (
The portorriqaeña emigration will receive ¡ a gnm impetus
1 Move company pan fomentarla'From our Correspondent in Cuba." i It is about to be formed in the Ha- 1 ! baña uiiu new Company that - 1 will aim to introduce in! < uba agricultural braceros duly- ■ । selected. This new ! Company, seeing the scarcity tieí ! steamers t-n which to drive the great . numen> of braceros needed , by the ingenios in this island, has acor-l given to purchase a steamer, "foot will make! . regular trips between Cuba and Puerto Rico. It is very probable , that this steamer will be destined to , carry coffee from PuerCo Rico to Cuba, when in> busy in the transport of agricultural workers- , colas The new enterprise comes to re-' solver "the great problems : the - decongestion of trente in our island, taking workers to Cu- . ba. dv>nde where there are splendid opportunities and where such high wages are paid : and. furthermore, to give outlet to our aromatic grain, which fetches such a good price in the merca. If sugar from Puerto Rieo continues to be sold at two dollars per quintal, this country will be an ex-. ' lens market for milk in- i i i vasada. argon opinion of Mr. t har; ' les X. Shacoff. president of the ¡ I "Xestle Food Cq.". of New York. í r-rólr. Shacoff adds that the always k |br* Ar^añ&^a dgdorólttMte w" : píte j Nías of milk, and as conse' cueneia. has increased eonsiderat blemen'.e the market for milk : canned or prepared. The growing | consumption of canned has been | so remarkable in recent years - 1 <fiee Mr. Shacoff-that it called"'" the I ■ attention. After some ÑG" * vestigaeiones. we have come to the , conclusion that this is due to ■ having been occupied lo^ pastures eon : cane plantations and other : products, the planting of which has now i been made exclusive on ]the Island. Mr. Shacoff believes that. if it is to be so. Puerto Rico will soon be dependent on the United States for two indispensable foodstuffs: milk and meat. UX CORRESPONDENT OF "EL ¡ ML'NDO" COMPLICATES DON I JOSE MARIA PABON I , i ~~ - I Don José María Pabón, of San Ger more. is publishing in the newspaper I "Diario de la Marina*", of Havana an announcement inquiring the residence of his son, José María Pabón, for the purpose of informing you of the death of his mother, and to acquaint you with the last testamentary dispositions of the deceased, which it is incumbent upon him to know, as the year of her heirs. EL MUNDO, without charging a penny to the aefier Patán, is "ampiare in de arta qde so bife Jote María Pabón y , Sltaar, resides at present, at calle Arsenal nmqevo 2, de la Habana, agrón two communicated ayo- mestro eo TTuapBnaal in aqoeUa pablaeión, the umf diitingnide gentleman dan Arturo MoralesYa knows the interested VMA DffRACOOir । Marcelino Jimenez, pleaded I guilty to a charge that eon- ¡ against him haMa filed by the Prosecutor, > for infraction of a resolution of CaaúaiÓB of the Public Service, and d judge Raaqr imposed on him ws dollar [fine and Jas costs. ncxMHhurn The following tetegeama tetegeama faé received and- IM.irM Rites Mdp Os. AmmeaMV-ma "BL 22, UM novíMAL nuc mes. co, lu Jasa, Pinato Rieo. á "Strooo XA cram A& A^pra "** ta a faite. The two ma pamoaa that the vipra* fata "s ta jk tata ds h trupmK .. . á Testo ORÍMMTE. 1 Mta a. as . _ - Adoe. | ■ ■■ । ।
Priaratives for It excursion i to Pimia Mars.
jlaRtei^^itáiCoHiK. ; A ata piien Ir il Plt■tenisa caapaüi * Ha site so"-">meiitad<7 by the ; pA-iodií-os "ie two States ('nidos ■ the trip to the piafceta Mars, proyecíta "lo by c4>itan Coilins. He proposes to use as a vehicle the high-powered rocket of which the eminent Professor Roheru H. Goddard has spoken, and which has been offered to accompany him on his fantastic expedition. ' Among the pardoners who sympathize with the famous trip is Miss Ruth Phillips, of Kansas L'ity. I ' This brave woman has an energetic per- phil, large, intelligent blue eyes, which seem to challenge everything with her bold gaze, and a very expressive smile which gives a peculiar expression of sympathy to her face. H"-here is the plan of the trip to Mars described by Captain Collins himself: "Some time ago I stated to a representative of the press that I had all the preparations for a trip to Mars. In the heat of the moment, it was said that I was trying to pave the way for a nationwide airplane tour to arouse enthusiasm for aviation in America. The maifitestation caused me ¡ only the greatest astonishmentI had to swallow resig- : natíly the most grqydes insults and falsehoods hurled with ^obobóeta <Vt jteráróMMtatata one of Tas golden rules of my life has been to keep my word, provided higher forces do not prevent me from doing so. "I have received several letters from some men of* science questioning me about my plans for a voyage to Mars, and to all I have contested that I am willing to eum plir what has been offered if the stipulations proposed by me are fulfilled. "I have been surprised by a veritable flood of letters from all quarters. Many have been curious to know in what manner I intend to carry out the great adventure, what I intend to do when I reach Mars, and in what manner I intend to return to earth. I have also received many letters "ie ladies, mothers and old people, aeon sejándome "pie not sacrifice my life. I must make eonstar that I am not a desperate weary of life, and that it is not my purpose to sacrifice my life uselessly, unnecessarily. "Many people wish to know if I have been in correspondence with Professor Goddard, the learned professor of science at Clark College, inventor of the super-rocket which, according to statements of the Smithsonian Institute, can be shot to the moon. Others believe that if it can reach Mars, a human being may be able to reach it. There is no sustained correspondence with Goddard. "If, when the colarte is tested, it reaches Mars andd^Lestableee c : munication with the planet, ent-on-(tkmtiBÚa in )n Úk pú^na) ■ ■' ■- - *■■■■■ ■E^ssi^MMaaaHaHi Victory Gaita COLOSAL AT 11*2 ItresKirte-tartatetet AMOR BHU&AM - -Forte Mbjfii Etefi of le tateta dte^tal *-. -" A£róa "Lk Rmík Á W*' Geeedoo rotee de W|Mfaronm ' PACO MMta -- 'j i ta-tataiRtafa "ta*'". m , i w"
[A surgeon gave 6 i stitches to a man's heart i ■■ ■ ■ -a. ¡
i Surprising operation given - account of in a trial for attempted manslaughter. I In Pittsburg, a case of attempted murder has been tried in court and has resulted in a surprising triumph for the eirujia. - Before the criminal court of that important city of Pennsylvania. 11 vania appeared as a witness Dr. J. F. Berg, of St. John's hospital, who testified that a suture of the heart had saved the life of Steve Be-lonik. This subject, in lu"-ha with i '-.John Hoza, received on April 9 ¡ ~,of last year such a tremendous eu-¡ -screech from behind that it cut off the left ventricle of co- 1 [reason. The surgeon exihibited several vis- * । photographic views taken by me-¡ " i dio of the X-rays and said that he had- ; ¿; had opened the rib cage, if- । moved several ribs and stitched-: I do the heart, giving him six punta-■ r i das. The result was so good, that on the 21st of the month the wounded man is out of danger. i ; Is it possible to dispel >1 comreio ¡ i te (futís m Puerto Rico? 1 It has recently been said that the fruit trade* is destined to de. * Mr. Georges A. Scott, of the Florida Fruit Exchange, has made the following statements: "From all parts of the country there is a strong and increasing demand for chi. ' f* TUMílt ■ Tteiá yWuna would tend at orders for ' fruit are being received from many parts. These conditions will be me- * jor if the rains in the northern part of the island, which almost always cause damage to the roads and ■ interrupt the. traffic, were to cease. FOR BUYING STOLEN GOODS3 Yesterday began the - hearing dó the accusation against Ma- - nuel Rivera, a merchant of Ca- ' taño, who, as you will remember núes - tros readers, bought from Ramon Garcia Santiago (a) La Loba, the ' goods which the latter stole from * the houses of 'A. M. Somoza y Co.' v "Cuétara Hermanos", which were valued at $1500.00. 1 Defending the abused was Ledo. Celestino Iriarte Jr. * who made a brilliant defense. The prosecution was sustained by the prosecutor - Diaz Collazo. After the trials, Judge Rossy gave due instructions to the jury, which, after deliberating, was unable to reach a verdict. THE BEL "PONCE" CARGO. The steamer "Ponce" brought 1856 ■ tons of cargo for San > Juan and the island, and <29 bulfeá de eo> TO COMPLETE THE GBgES BElT THE PLANA BE CAfEt. The Governor Iproved the ordinance of the Carey Assembly, providing for the etotrfata&i da an loans of $1^00 with the "Bañ. : eo Commercial ", to finish, the obhte da reform- of that pia- i zq of recreation. "The noeabre of Don Ma- ; nuel Mendía as candidate unjo : nista papa he /Áfta 4 e Comwiona- ; do deT-Sérvirfó Publico sounds. 'aMtesataitaiMBoaoataMMR 8 Combat Ate. Ex^l: I sivñcALóa,ccwxA |: S EXQUISITA I; f "NEW STYÍR Lróta I: Aróptahte pgrE* ; Dr. 9t Rtap.
The Teutonic revolutionaries accepted lajsfldition.
j (By French Cable) I | MAGUNCIA, March 26- Infor ' month of Berlin say qiiv l)a agreement has been signed between the anU> ridatles and the workers revoi Incionarios who s ( . have become strong ¡ tes in the mining basin "leí Ruhr, 1 । to surrender. The eondieions are ; i the following: Formaeifm of an '¡ ¡ army of workers, eiir.irea. j do to maintain ¡ public tranquility; give participation to the I Unions in the Government; "bsarme of those who took part in the coup "ie State; vote for new social laws, and, jmr lastly, ' ' socialize the mines. । : NUMEROUS TURKS ¡ REDUCED TO PRISON | CONSTANTINOPLA, Mar., 26. j-Numerous nationali* I t4is Deputies have been reduced to prióu by the Inter-allied police. The Turkish Congress unanimously approved a protest, which will be ¡ addressed to the parliaments-, <]e i France, England and the United States, against the violent proceeding of the said .police. It is believed that numerous demonstrations of protest will join that of the Parliament. ANATOLIA IS INDIGNANT OVER ALLIED OCCUPATION BEIRUT, March 26. Anatolia say that the occupation of the capital has produced there enormous impression and indeseripi tibie indignation. । Mustafa Kemal is endeavoring to Lto<taim"^ta4róe";^<Mnqire fears [that oeurraú bloody riots. There are outbreaks of rebellion in Brusa, ' Balik isa and Panderuma, where there are not , troops enough to eoni hold the crowds. [ In the Aidin region the Naci-. ! nalists attempted to sack the po- ¡ blation of Salilie, but were ex- । terminated by the crowdi DR- ASHFORD WRITES THE I SCIENTIFIC HISTORY OF THE i WAR Colonel Bailey K. Ashford has í received a dispatch from Washington i :<>mtinicandolc uve been ¿chosen i to write the Medical History of the Great War. This work, says Dr. Ashford, is so daunting and difficult that it requires at least two years of study and research. A PORTORRIQUEÑO ASSASSINATED IN SANTO DOMINGO. I In the place called "Los Llanos", was assassinated the portorriño Andrés González (a) Guayamo, by the subject Pedro Ortiz, of Dominican nationality. Ortiz, upon being caught, refused to follow the authority, for which the Mayor decided to wield a machete, with which he inflicted several wounds. MU0HA0B0S BELLICOSE ! The police arrested yesterday Prei sentation AJvarez and Pedro Pagan, boys of 14 afios, who i sustained a quarrel in the street of : the Moon, from which resulted the pri- ¡ mero with a strong contusion gn the head and a wound, as fie tree centimeters, e" U tetilla isqmerda, produced by strong n^qr disk that gave him his eonfendiénte.
< ""4 1 u-i i n 1 1111111 m n 111 h M 1 1 1 11 "i w m m c "uta "1111 y ti TOMORROW SUNDAY ■ -ü: AT THE "LUNA" CINEMA. ::: y Pirarte 4" ThM : > i: cm MíHE; íh ■ : t" taita jfatate ¿ oMV "roi|teteMateaMta S "i - . X. - '■ ; ~
The datai baco crop has been toI tally sold I
Ninety percent of the tobacco exist. ' tenances of tobacco on the Island have been bought in the last forty-eight hours. Prices ranging from 55 to 70 cents per pound have been paid, and more than ten million dollars have been employed in the operation. I The principal buyers have been the "Porto Rican American To. bacco Co.", "La Plata Tobacco Co.", "Durlach Bros.", "The American Su ¡ matra Tobacco Co.", "Rosenstadt and : Waller", "Max Gans and Sons", Fer. ¡ nando Alvarez and others. j The present tobacco crop has ¡ been lower * than that of last year. But, on the other hand, prices have been higher, twenty million pounds having been sold, on the whole, at sixty-seven cents. In June the Orando of the harbor will commence The work of dredging the ■ bay will commence in the first ! days of June and will last for me. ■ nos, four years, according to i Colonel Laugfitt, in charge of the work. ¡ An army tugboat I has already left for Mobile, Alabama, for - the purpose of picking up the dredge and driving it to Puerto Rico. He expects that the equipment and machinery to start the work will be here by the fifth of June at the latest. Approximately five million cubic feet will be dredged in the bay; and according to Colonel l^angfitt's estimates, the bottom will be removed at the rate of < one hundred thousand cubic feet per month. ! - Lwu ♦ under the immediate direction of Mr. Stierle. caprtáb of engineers, I who has arrived at San Juan. Humus Hums te víteos ¡ to toarte a Sm Juan Messrs. "Body Brothers" have ; been appointed agents in Puerto [ Rico of important European lines of vapo-1 res. These steamers will call at San Juan and belong to the following lines: "International Mercantile Marine", "White Star Line", "Atlantic Trans- 1 port Line", "American Line", "Faber Line", "Holland American Line" and "La Veloce Italian Line". INDEMNIFICATION FOR $3,500. Yesterday a suit was filed in Federal Court by Juan Torres Lefebre against Carlos Garcia, for damages, in which he requests an indemnity of $3500, because when he was riding a moped from Ponce to the beach, he was run over by the defendant's car, suffering a fractured jaw and several strong contusions in different parts of his body. YESTERDAY'S REGISTRATIONS. Yesterday 589 voters were registered in San Juan and were duly identified. POLITICAL MEETING Last night there was an important: political meeting in the game 7, of ¡ Puerta de Tierra. A.sistió to the act the plana máynr of the party united-" ñuta, making oso of i* word several political men;