ELMUNDO
I - OKstaass Sahradar BraaC n | TaL m P. a Box MB ! -R
8 pages 3 ctvs. -
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
U
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RKO
F amaina aa aecoaS da- ñauar. f - b ru ar> 11. 1BÍ*. I ■ ¡ " ¿"íAf* I SATURDAY, JIUO 10, 10'0. ¡ NUMBER 431.
Allies send ef ultimatum to Germany The "Alfonso XIII" entered escorted by more than a hundred ships.
The Mpisiasseve-: W m Sai" Jua^ Yesterday- appeared before the Federal Court Julio Ay bar, Policarpo Ortiz, I "1 Committee of the Dock Strike and several other strikers. who, as readers will recall, have been denounced for violating the federal "Le ver" law, for threatening and preventing strikebreakers from working when there is a strike, represented by their attorney Henry G. Molina, who filed a motion requesting the court to countermand the order for the prosecution of the strikers to be held in San Juan instead of Ponce. Prosecutor Martin opposed the motion, which was discussed at length by both counsel. Judge Hamilton stated that he wished to give every opportunity to the defendants to seek their best means of defense, so he declared the defense counsel's motion granted, and ordered the clerk, Licúo. Antonio Aguayo, to give notice to all the jurors who had been summoned to appear in the court of Ponce on the 2nd at nine o'clock in the morning, to do so on the 19th in San Juan, to submit the strikers to the process with the jurors of the aforementioned town. DON ANTONIO GOMEZ Is again in San Juan, after some weeks of absence. this excellent gentleman, worthy represented s* "ÉredeAR SWarns & vo"" Detrojt, Mích. This important firm is one of the best and strongest in its class. Its drugs, its specifics and its patents, have a world-wide reputation, being in great demand wherever they are found, and this, coupled with the developed intelligence of Mr. Gomez, who understands the business, is a powerful motive for increased sales, as is shown by the handsome business he does wherever he goes. In a few days, after resting from his recent trip to Santo Domingo, he will begin his excursions in Puerto Rico to fill all the Pharmacies of his great clientele with his favorite patentizados. We salute this distinguished gentleman and friend, congratulating him for his new triumphs in the land of Quisqueya. MATINEE Tomorrow, at three o'clock in the afternoon, there will be a matinee at the Municipal Theater, ■ by the same celebrated company that visits us today. In Arecibo On the 14th, 15th and 16th of the month of July, the beautiful film production LOS ARLEQUINES DE SEDA Y ORO will be shown at the Oliver Theater, "CINE VICTORIA", which has attracted so much enthusiasm and interest everywhere. A large number of seats have been subscribed and the public is anxiously awaiting these three nights of beauty and beauty. Special music is being planned to be played during the three nights. Advi. Buttons are pleated and lined. AC ARAZO, Brau St. 72. For Mechanic Shop We have in Stock DRILLS, REOORTING MACHINES LATHES Mature WORKING MACHINES Veng® * venae KORBER A CO. SAN JUAN, P. R.
Granites honors Dr. Betances in the capital of Cuba On the evening of June 21 ceiebW ! extraordinary session the board of directors of the "Centro Portorriqueño do Cuba." The following resolutions were adopted: To celebrate a solemn evening in the second half of July in homage to the memory of Dr. Betances. To invite the President and the Vice President of the Republic. I To invite the Secretaries of the Secretaries of the Republic and all the Puerto Ricans residing in Cuba who are in a position to attend the act. 1 To request the cooperation of the Academy of Sciences, since Betances was a distinguished physician. The program of the evening was outlined, in which Fernando Figuere do, Antonio Iraizoz and Néstor Carbonell will speak. It was stated that all the expenses of this evening will be defrayed with the funds of the "Centro Portorriqueño", without any contest. It was also agreed to send circulars to all the most important corporations and commercial houses in Cuba, offering competent personnel for the positions they need. Correspondence, requests for placements and other reports should be addressed to the "President of the Puerto Rican Committee", Tejadillo 22. ■ All vacancies for placements will be published in the magazine "Las Antillas". It is hereby stated that the "Centro Por Jorriqueño" will lend its support to Amoral Cuba in soliciting work, without any commitment or responsibility whatsoever. More than 30 letters have been received in the month of June from Puerto Ricans who wish to come to work in the great Antilles. We know that there is a shortage of competent personnel in various business houses and corporations, particularly stenographers; but these positions are needed to be filled at once, and not to wait for weeks or months, the time it would take for the personnel to come from Puerto Rico. For this reason we cannot guarantee any placement. To the young ladies who write to us requesting work in Cuba, I will tell them that the city of Havana is very dangerous for young women who come alone and without family to accompany them. We would also like to see our countrywomen emigrate. Most of those who emigrate in Puerto Rico are men, young bachelors who marry outside their country, and that is a great evil that is done to our countrywomen and to the homeland. The scientific careers and the degrees or diplomas of Puerto Rican teachers have no value in Cuba. Those who have a future and work here are those who have commercial and industrial knowledge. At present there are thousands of Puerto Ricans in Cuba and several hundred in Havana. All of them are happy and working. Arrangements are being made to obtain an important assignment and to offer it to Mr. Celestino Rodriguez, from Fajardo, ' with the purpose of having him come to Havana and hold the position of Secretary of the "Centro Portorriquefio". Mr. Rodriguez Gonzalez is a very worthy Puerto Rican, enlightened, cultured and correct gentleman. He was a teacher of many Puerto Ricans who today, in different professions, are useful men to society and the country. Here, in Cuba, he has several of his disciples, who admire and love him. All his disciples are honest, hard-working and fervent por - torriqueños who practice the lessons taught to them in their childhood by their beloved teacher. ARTURO MORALES. WAR TO DEATH TO THE "BOLSHEVIKIS" (BY ENGLISH CABLE.) WAR TO DEATH TO THE "BOLSHEVIKIS" (BY ENGLISH CABLE.) WARSAW, July 9, - Students, teachers and women mobilize me with enthusiasm to defend the country against the "bolshevikis", who threaten to destroy it with blood and fire.
The great playwright Linares Oteas: is our guest w As we had announced in yesterday's edition, from Venezuela has arrived in San Juan the notable company* of the theater of LaI v and the eximid. Spanish literary don - ■ Manuel Linares Rivas. Shortly after having attracted ' ; cado next to the pier No. ó the Manuel : Calco, distinguished peÉsdftalities of i - the locality, Mr.? Consul of Spain, i i i some representatives of the local press and commissions of the Casino and the Casa de España, went up to greet him and welcome him on behalf of the whole Puerto Rican society, which has so often applauded his beautiful comedies. In representation of the Spanish colony of Puerto Rico, which has always been able to manifest its noble and ardent enthusiasm for everything that represents a glory of the homeland or a prestige of the Race, the great comedian was welcomed by Don José Pérez Loada, Don Dionisio Trigo, Don José M. Lomba, Don Emilio Jiménez, Don Romualdo Real and Don Ignacio Merjeliza. ' Disregarding formulaic labels, Mr. Linares had for everyone an affectionate smile, a cordial gesture and a phrase of gratitude. "The countries I have visited-he told our editor-have left me in awe. Caracas is a very cultured capital-Cp Lronnéqüiera qu^^re ido I have eñcbnttSdo something of Spain: customs, ti- i pos, traditions of race, the same en 1 tusiasmo, the same exaltation for all the beautiful and great things of life, the same old gentle ^a chivalrous. and the language, above all the language, which is the best vín< allo of union, the strongest bond er:re the young republics of America and the peninsula. I do not come here as an ambassador of La Raza-tell him so in your newspaper-but as a simple curious person eager to see for his own eyes the soul of America, where Spain watered the seed of European culture, raising veiite na1 ciones that are like twenty diamonds set in her crown of glory." We can anticipate to our readers that we have as our guest a great man, of great talent, of a great heart, and modest like "all those who are truly great. Clauses of incorporation 1 We have received the clauses of in- ' corporation of the partnership named Rossy and Co. Inc. of M^y^Kuez. The purpose of the new corporation will be the manufacture of general soaps and all kinds of perfumery articles. The authorized capital of this corporation is five thousand dollars, and its incorporators are E. F. Rossy Gregory, Francisco Servera. Silva, Guillermo Rost sy Palmer and Cesar Rossy Palmer. ' -BACK TO WORK i k Hpy the slow- 1 - Spinners at the tobacco factory of ■ 1 L'Hño Marias y Freiría are back to work. ¡ l According to reports the house has accepted some of the demands inter8posed by them. j i. One of the strikers reported to us that the factory recognized, in part, her Union and allowed her to have a reader during working hours.
A horrible tem- . pestatRcausa da- * (BY G^LE ENGLISH) ' QRANADA >Ho 9.-A horrible storm, which Buró several hours, pro ; dujo immensce *ños eu the ddiúcíos and ' ■ in the crops.!!!!! ' Alguitas ^nhMrfiyir have qhedado in . J ruins. . > PANCHO WLLA SURRENDERS f t CIUDAD DRgCEJICO, July 9.-The i Señor T .Mirier ón in charge of i the negotiacídfaK to get the bandit Pnnágf Villa to lay down his ac i | titude and acaMp^ai cons.itui cionalist Government conzRhuó succeeded in his ¡ : purposes. . -J^R i Refiarmes- oÑfl^Bs say that Pancho i VSta signed the anusticío that he was pre ' ' ' seated, and was 3 I to legality.  XHI' ' At 10 o'clock in the morning, the magnificent battleship entered the port, escorted by a flotilla of merchant ships and a hundred tugboats. More than three thousand people filled the entire barracks, from which they cheered the sailors. The reception was grandiose Mena the Commander, VteHru -wwuo eon nT mayor* of Havana, Dr. Varona Suarez; । twenty bands played the Spanish "Marcha Real" and ensorde cedores vivas filled the port and the city. The aviator Madame Herve aux and a squadron of airplanes covered the deck of the "Alfonso XIII" with precious bouquets of flowers, which fell from the clouds. The officers were carried on shoulders by the students of the University who competed for the honor. The program of the festivities, which is lavish and magnificent, will be extended. 1 for the "Alfonso. XTIT" will spend eight days in Havana. THE BUBONIC PESTE IN THE UNITED STATES AUSTIN (State of Texas), July 9. -The authorities in the State have dis, covered eight cases of bubonic plague, < which have produced some alarm THE "LEAGUE" CONGREGATES NEXT NOVEMBER J LONDON, July 9.-It has been announced in the House of Commons that President Wilson has accepted the commission to convene the assembly of the "League of Nations" to meet early next November. i" ALLIES PRESENT "ULTIMATUM" TO GERMANY I BRUSSELS, July 9.-the representatives of the Allied nations in the! The representatives of the Allied nations at the Spa Conference decided to present the "ultimatum," which has the character of a declaration of war, to Germany. Bn the bellicose docuineute demands that Germany reduce her army in oc ; ! tabre to 150,000 men", and *100,000 in ¡ ' January; the deetruction of all ar-j | ma"; the entxdg* of all "i material of j I guana- and 1* abolition abaolut" of compulsory ser' vice. j The note concludes dácisudo that. if ' Ahaumi* s" refuses to answer before | tomorrow at 2 o'clock in the afternoon, loa AHai two occupies Hei immediately the district of the Rilar.
Mesa labor lile- : raria of the distinguished author of the Carra' ■ To the illustrious Spanish comediographer who ! is today a guest of Puerto Rico, admi ' rado here as there through innu ¡ mera bles productions of diverse ín- - dole, is unknown in his aspect, not menes interesting and outstanding of "cau?eur". The Spanish comrades surrender to the suggestion of his penetrating irony, of his fearsome mordacity, a worthy emulation of the Benaventian. In . satoncillos y ' *camerinos' en a Ignita < public conference, too-this playwright, storyteller and chronicler charms i dor, assaults, with his particular comments. cor suf pro c aj fluently ame ñas, stabs of gravity. The zum í bonena. capital humorism. on every occasion fluid, easy and prodi- . gos will greet the Linares Rivas, confe ; renciante, as an old acquaintance, who returns. The smile, the half-laughter and the laughter will unite all of us, both small and Spanish, for a few short days. Just as the "Teatro Lara" has evolved, of course, in the same upward direction, - the author of "La Garra" Linares Rivas is today at the height of his maturity as a playwright. He has achieved enormous successes, and each one of his works represents a prodigy of youth, of freshness and ideological genre, of dramatic amplification and consolidation. Those comedies called by someone, of "tea with pasta"-kind, however-;""tán -and of -te" te "hnrw-n"-bles. virile.-somewhat declamatory, perhaps-. but robust, beautifully tantive. Behind the humorist, the compassionate one emerges, and among the sarcasm and mockery, the thinker who apostrophizes or corrects with a certain systematism of após toL stands out his heroic silhouette. Let us praise the faith that encourages him and the healthy intention that obsesses him. .C DISTINGUISHED TRAVELERS. On the steamer "Brazos" returned to San Juan last Thursday the most esteemed and learned gentleman Mr. José Aguirre in the company of his worthy wife, Mrs. Anita Saldada de Aguirre. The distinguished spouses, who enjoy a well-deserved esteem in the society of San Juan, spent a very pleasant season in the United States. We are pleased to send you affec- ! teous greetings. i The coiQMíi M hrrociml Certificate of reI gist re has been issued to the í Ci'C,i n 'xi la ció m de Puerto Rieo Railroad Company, whose i principal purposes are to acquire by rom ¡ pra voluntarily or at judicial sale and i build and equip railroads and i tramways at any point in the L"- ■ la. and to operate the same by steam ! or by any other power that may be I convenient and practicable. Its authorized capita'. ' authorized is $10,000,000, and its in Icorporators are Manuel Gonzalez, Rafael Fabian. Luis Rubert. Dionisio ! Trigo. Antonio M. Somoza v Francis ;H. Dexter. ' LA RAZA" I - ! í Tomorrow, Sunday, will be represented at the Municipal Theater, by the noI table company of Emilio Thullier. i the famous play entitled La Rasa, by the celebrated comedian, Don Manuel Li- - nares Rivas, with whose visit Puerto Rican society is currently honored.
HURRICANE INSURANCE In companies authorized ^by the Government at rates and conditions without competition* offer : J. QCHQA & HERMANO " SAN JUAN, P. R. e. : -
Two bloody events occurred in Vega Baja J ULIO 6.-Last night we were irJozmaáo< of an event o<. united er colony - El Blandito". of Ye = uidn. camo. of this municipality. The 'uez. señor Carreras; the chief of ia police, señor Fianceschi; doctor Armaíz and virios policía.^ se personare at the site of the occurrence, which was the house of Jnan Rivero, first butler of the wealthy owner don Artura Gue na. He says that Justino Quijano is his foster son and that he has always tried to please him and help him in everything, that today he is a young man of twenty-one aims and that he still lives supported by the protection that he always willingly and sincerely gives him. That on the occasion of certain disagreements that occurred, which he does not wish to make known to the public, there was a clash of words, which resulted in several shots fired between them, and that one of the shots wounded him. That he believed to have killed him and ordered the authorities to come The wounded Justino, feeling wounded, fled through a piece of reeds, and being overcome by the wear and tear of forces, fell senseless. It took time and effort to find the wounded man's fall. The night was dark and it was raining heavily. With lanterns they searched for him; until they finally found the young Quijano, who was immediately taken to the hospital. It appears that the weapon was a pistol. Ei condition of the relative is not serious The family of the wounded ie moved this manan to his home. The gentleman Rivcro presto fauna for his freedom provrsrcna! and the ann: was occupied. The case is of some importance, being a man who enjoys general sympathy and respect, for his character as a supper m nia. In the Unionist party, he has acquired such prominence that he was once the subject of the nox-bramieu to of the Warden of this town. Of the young Quijano we have not known that there is* marched his name with repugnant he chos. RAIL ACCIDENT Yesterday when the mail train coming from Ponce was passing through the point Humus Algarrobo, very close to the station, was thrown out of the young Sanees Pedrogo. The young Pedrogo says that he was preparing to move to the mail car, in order to prepare for the disembarkation of the cargo destined for Vega Baja; but that in a sudden stop he was thrown out of the car; that when he fell he was dragged, so he received bruises all over his body. In his head he received several wounds, and his left arm is splinted, and his right thigh is also wounded. Pedrogo is 22 years old, is a native of Juana Diaz and six days ago he was married. In the hall of pudientes of the hospital, he lies in rama He says he is very satisfied with the a'.encixme" that. both doctors and nurses. ~ have lent him. He is waiting for his wife, whom he ulegjafed. and supposes that within five days he will be perfectly recovered. THE CORRESPONDENT
-Mexico City is' a hotbed of propaganda^bolsheviki' The Dcpan^Ejent of State in W sh_ i ir.gicn has cz his possession vane exempl* - ies of the disrio - Exeeisicr". of Meñoq, in which anancka ei e-~tibleci- , miento i? rna branch eu ta Amenes Latina in ta Tercers IsitermnomLl of Moscow cor. a "ente in 1% ctpj -^i of Mexico. This rsos^ovita s? in- ; will be to extend its propaganda bal -lieviki" er North America and in the Amenci del Ser According to the ExcelsiCT' the capital of Mexico is the center of the ac- ("ivities - bolshevtics in ei contuses 1 te south. and dttde alb serin dmgidos sides the mc-vunieirtos of as agents ■ so viets" in les State^, cuidos and in ios i countries of ta Aminna ¡adns The Mexican police ie according to published reports.', has proceeded to arrestix the agents of the government "so ■ viet" moscovita. At different times during the last two years, "soviet" agents, supplied with money in abundance and with credit cards and all kinds of documents, have arrived in Mexico from different European and United States countries, and are said to be strongly organized. In the "soviet" organization of refe- , rence is az representatai - several na. cionalities. cutre them Russia. Emnaes. Germany, Hindustan and the United States. Many of the American so viets' agents are deserters from the compulsory military service law The head of the gs "ta" called Craeseuberg. and has skipped pure Moscow in company d" other comrades for the purpose of raising funds in Russia per value fie ten and octal millions for, defraying the expenses d" 1* propaganda * ■ bolsheviki' ' in tas two Americas GRATJTUn Sir Pedro de Macona Republic Da mm-xme. jumo 21 ie ISlíL Dr L Lopez d< la Eosa. Metier C ir i^ana. - Far Fran tasco No. 32. San Juan. P. B. Mry señer mio; Having written to me my lady spasi. doña Dolores R de Rodriguez, 'that you were the doctor who was able to atf nar cor her illness, until couro guix sr perfect state of salnd. I would like to express to you, in my name and in hers, our most sincere thanks for your good services as well as I am also grateful to you for the formula that you were good enough to send me by condqctc d" your husband. to attack the fever of which he was victim in this city. Cor wishes qne you eautxnñe éb having successes, qnede of you S. S. and friend, JOSE RODRIGUEZ Lieutenant of the G. N. D. Advt. A VISO' A VISO' A tobacco farmers offer". To the tobacco growers, we offer tobacco seed in grain, selected"" L of 1" best that there is ea its daze, propf . for sowing * intemperie and under cloth. For information on any quantity, please contact Antonio Fmriwdw. ToL i No. 1 P. O. Box 7. Junco". Y. R.
r + i ■ ■ ■ H Doña Emilia van Rhyn de Finlay ■ ■ DIED YESTERDAY AT ll^S A. M. AT SANTTRCE. H ■ His daughter, deüa Emilia Ftalay and his h "o politice, om T- G. L Way- ■ H mouth participate this Morusa noted to his amiotañes and i send to the burial which will depart ^e the Plazuela de Coió^ at ciare ñe this afternoon for the cemraírrio de San Jnan, antwipaaaie the graH das to the qpe 4 ene erran, per the pious act. ■ St. Jme. P- R. JnSo IR MOR. K :^m No repartea "aqaelas-.