elmBndo
8 pages 3 ctvs. | "r - Semester, $4.00 One year, $.7.50
I Offices: i i Salvador Brau, 81 I Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR II | SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
p - "nd diatnbutad andar permit (Ko. 801) authorized by tha? het of cetvuar #. 191? on Sia at the Poat Office of San Juan, Porto
fanteraú - - "oevad claM Battar, fabruary J 1 , A W A " . -t Poat Offica - t 8 - b Juan. Porto Etico, ( ü a i * - < a".... -- o" "<-t wo'-ch - 1ST"
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 23, 1920.
NUMBER 520.
Americans want to remain in Haiti Germany refuses to cede new territories.
A son of Romanones has tragically perished.
Cannons stop thundering on the Polish border - Russia sends nn^ << ahimatum n to the Armenians.
(FRENCH CABLE) MADRID, Oct. 22. -The death was announced of Lieutenant Romanones, son of the Spanish politician gnn. from wounds received in the field. IMPORTANT MEETING TO DEAL WITH THE UUTILGA ISSUE LONDON, October 22. The Railway Employees' Union, the heads of the Transport Workers' Association and the Trades Unions' Regrettable Committee held an important meeting today to discuss the question of the miners' strike. There was also a meeting of the National Union of Railway Employees, which is considered to be of extraordinary importance, because it was held to discuss a strike in solidarity with the miners The Prime Minister, Lloyd George, has coolly declared that he is willing to enter into negotiations, but that he must first know the motives of the miners. The Prime Minister, Lloyd George, has coolly declared that he is ready to enter into negotiations, but that it is necessary first to know the reasons for the workers' violent attitude, by which the active life of the country has been paralyzed. XXth AGREEMENT BETWEEN BELGIUM AND BRAZIL HAS NOT BEEN CONCLUDED ETO DB JANEIRO, Oct. 22. - The looses circulated with regard to the aeuer have been partially denied by the Government of the latter nation. THE GERMANS DO NOT WANT SUN * TAB VARIOUS REGIONS KrpT.ro .october 22. -General Dupont, chairman of the German-Polish Boundary Limitation Commission, has addressed a note to the German Delegation, drawing its attention to the fact that the localities of Klein. Lebenstaüb Nappin and Grechen on the left bank of the Vistula have not yet been annexed to Poland" as agreed by the Conference of Ambassadors. HUNDRED MILLION DOLLARS FOR FOREIGN TRADE war ni MOTON, October 22. - The American Convention of Bankers approved the proposition organizing an I mpoi n ien with a capital of one hundred million dollars, destined for foreign trade. ITALIAN AMBASSADOR LEAVES FOR HIS COUNTRY NEW YORK, Oct. 22.-Avez_ zana, ■■Ambassador of Italy, has left on the steamer "Adriatic'* for Italy. On the uin" steamer has left the Delega cite diplaattiea of Bolivia, who is to attend the Conference of the "Waríw League" to be verified at Gé nova. Pancnnserving the stomach^ liver and intestines healthy* ásense the Pfldoras de Vida del Dr. Raes.
AMERICAN INTERVENTION I HAITI TO BE EXTENDED FOR MANY YEARS WASHINGTON, Oct. 22- The ■" Imira nt* Knapp, recently sent by the State Department for the purpose of studying the new con dition of American military intervention in Haiti, has reported that the military occupation must still be prolonged for many years. MARSHAL PETAIN LAYS A CROWN ON THE TOMB OF LEMAN PARIS, October 22-Marshal Petain, who will represent the French army at the funeral of General Leman, has left for Belgium. The Marshal will place on the tomb of the heroic defender of Liège a beautiful ribbon with this inscription: "To the heroic General Léman. Tribute from the French army". THE MINISTERS EXAMINE THE QUESTION OF THE SUPPLY PARIS, October ^1- -The competent Ministers of the Republic have met for the purpose of examining the question relative to the supplying of the populations which were invaded. MILLERAND VOWS FRIENDSHIP WITH ITALY PARIS, October 22. The President of the Republic received the members of the Franco-Italian League. M. Millerand made vows for the friendship of both nations and for the happiness of the Italian Government. i BELGIAN CABINET RESIGNS BRUSSELS, October 22 --The news of the resignation of the Cabinet is confirmed. M Delacroix will resign his office for two -reasons: Because of the exce so of work and because of the numerous ata , ques to which he has been subjected on account of his policy of conciliation. WAR IN POLAND HAS CEASED WAR IN POLAND WAR IN POLAND WAR IN POLAND VARSOVIA. October 22-Military action has ceased, as of midnight, on the whole front. A "ULTIMATUM FROM RUSSIA TO THE ARMENIAN GOVERNMENT WARSAW, October 22.-The "Soviet" Government has addressed an ultimatum to Armenia demanding the free movement of Russian and Kemalist troops along the Armenian railroads. The Armenian Government strongly refused to accede to this request. THE HEALTH OF THE KING ATHENS, October 22-Today's bulletin announces a slight improvement in the health of the Greek sovereign. a Dr. Molina of St. Remy OCULIST If Special surgery of the eyes, ears 1 nose and throat ! 54 Alian, entering by Tanca 1 Consultations from 10 to 12 and from 2 to 5 Phone 207 -San Juan, P. R. Advt.
"LA VELOCE' ' Naaigaxione italiana, a Vapore - Genova. I Italian Steamer "SAVOIA" is expected in this port towards < < < * lo. do November and will be dispatched bound for Port Pla' > ta, R. D.; Port-au-Prince. Haiti; Santiago de Cuba and Haba. < < < ► na, Cuba; and Veracruz, Mexico. Will admit cargo for the ■ I port states. For further inquiries contact BEHN BROTHERS, INC, AGTS.
HIGH QUALITY - LOW PRICE
Palm Beach in All Sizes All Styles All Colors for Gentlemen and YOUTH.
Santos Chocano has been expelled from Guatemala' I i i The government of Guatemala ordered ex- ] pulsar from the republic the illustrious portal! Santos Chocano. We believe that the vivid bard, glory of Spanish poetry, will happily comply with this condition imposed on him. And we do not say this to the detriment of the little Eepubli- i ca. to which the fates seem to be favorable. But because the magnificent lyre-bearer has suffered too much in that country not to move away from it (full of satisfaction), and because he has not been able to leave it (full of satisfaction). For many days there was talk that he would be condemned to death, news that produced in Spain and throughout America true sorrow. Ncs we imagine that the bard had ( ¡ to conceive, then, very few espe-1 j , ranzas of salvation. We imagine ¡ i his state of mind and his anguish, as j now his joy at seeing himself free again, his again the future, all roads open to new adventures and new adventures. í We will not judge here the part of Santos Chocano's guilt in the events of Guatemala. í We will not judge here the man nor his sins. The great artists enjoy the privilege of being esteemed for their glories and not for their personal acts. Mirabeau will always be for posterity the orator par excellence, as Oscar Wilde will always be the marvelous artificer of the English language. What we do wish to commend is the attitude of the new Guatemalan rulers, whose ge ' neresidad 1^ makes them sympathetic and worthy of the consolidation of their political conquests. The poet's condemnation would have served to punish a political enemy, but would have, at the same time, robbed Spanish literature of one of its pontiffs. The clemency of the victors has always made their triumphs more glorious and greater. In Cuba they expect the price of sugar to rise WARAKA, October 12. - In this capital the price of sugar is expected to rise, the fall of which was the determining factor in the economic situation we are now going through. But this situation is being favorably resolved, because both individuals and the government are lending their full support to the banks. I The foreign banks which have offices here have also decided to avail themselves of the moratorium decreed by the authorities. ; i SUGAR MARKET 1 i Cable received from New York: i j A small sale was made of sugar j ¡ i from Puerto Rico at $8.75. By next month - 1 it is expected to be able to sell at $9-1 ¡ THE "JULIAN ALONSO" f About the 30th of the present the Cuban steamer "Julian Alonso," of the "Red D. Line," will epera ► in this city.
II 90 A X íoo
Edison has begun to communicate with the spirits TLAMMARION ELOGIA THE PORTENTIOUS DISCOVERY The American newspapers consecrate the columns of their editorials and information to estndi&r and comment on the last invention of! magician Edison, whose invention consists of a wonderful ins- ! truniento that communicates the world of the living with the spiritual world. According to the experiments carried out so far by Mr. Edison himself, it can be assured that the new instrument will replace the secret séances of spiritism and the mediumistic faculties of several enthusiastic propagators of this mysterious science. The noted and well-known physician Rus-' sel H. Conwell, founder and director of Temple University, believes that Edison's invention will communicate with the spirits, and adds that the wireless telegraph is, in his opinion, the first step toward achieving communication with the world of the dead. - Positively," adds the distinguished man of science, "the soul exists after death. Bear in mind that I do not pretend to prove that the soul is immortal, but that our personality exists and is maintained after the decomposition of the organ. These are precise facts which have received sincere and unquestionable proof. Call these manifestations of spirits or whatever. but what is certain is that they are unmistakable indications that the soul exists and does not disappear with matter." Gen. Me Intyre writes to GovernorMr.Yager E! Governor has received the following letter from Genea il Me. Intyre í !a which, as it contains several matters of public interest, is given to publicity: " i "Honorable Arthur Yager, Governor of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P. R. i My dear Governor: : I have received your communication of Sept. 27 i. At the last meeting of ■ the Board of Directors of the "Panama Railroad Company" the Secretary of the Company told 'the Secretary of War that it had been possible to obtain a new ship convenient for the traffic between Haiti, Puerteo Rico and St. Thomas; but he could shortly dedicate ii such traffic the "ADVANCE," which is one of his steamers. Es- ; to, probably, was a little big of for the case, but this seemed the ■ only possible solution. The "ADVAN' CE" would be available for that purpose there by mid-November. í As I am leaving tomorrow, I will not have time to attend to the other two matters mentioned in your communication, namely, one, that of sending correspondence over the Puer to Rico line instead of the " D Network," x and the other,
San Juan Ponce - Mayaguez, Inc.
Dr. Zayas will be elected President of Cuba (FROM HAVANA) Is there anything more eloquent than the numbers, and not the numbers invented by passionate partisanship, but the official figures of the organizations accepted by both parties? - Will there be anything more decisive than a total su ma done not in Prado y Trocade ro, nor in the office of Dr. Zayas, but in the highest electoral court of the Republic? । The whole nation already knows these data, more convincing than all the speeches that could be pronounced during the campaign. The people, before the first of November, have already ruled. The masses have rendered their verdict. After this, only violence or frau de can countermand the will of the So:beran .... Enough of this exordium. Here are the irrefragable and definitive numbers: Pinar del Río Difference in favor of the League: 18,864. Havana. Difference in favor of the Conservatives: 8,684. Matanzas. Conservative majority: 6,745. ! Las Villas, tabernacle of the miguelis i mo, homeland of Tiburón: notwithstanding all < that, the League remains above there with . i Camaguey. Difference in favor of the ! conservatives: 1,523. i And, finally, Oriente, which with Pinar del . | Rio are in the lead as far as sea .: gen is concerned, will favor the conservatives with an advantage of 13,637. . Adding up these^ provincial totals and checking the addition for more certainty, as recommended by arithmetic, we see that the conservative registration exceeds the opponent by the respectable figure of 50,777..... Are we right, then, if we affirm that Dr. Zayas will be President of the Republic? THE PATRIOT MAYOR Today, October 23, has been fasting for 73 days, in Brixton Jail, the brave and noble Mayor of Cork, Mr. Me Swiney. A suspected case % of bubonic plague The American steamer "Pamco," from Mexico, arrived at Haba- ' na with a suspected case of ■ bubonic plague. There, the Captain of the aforementioned > merchant ship stated that the crew member suffered a fall on board, which produced the bubo, which has led him to assume that it is of bubonic origin. Notwithstanding this statement, the Infectious Diseases Commission has been summoned to diagnose the illness suffered by the aforementioned crewman. t For the time being, the ship has been placed under strict quarantine. , ~ .i- . . - The possibility of the "Ward Line" touching at Sin Juan. These matters will have to be dealt with and you will be advised of them at a later date. Most sincerely, ► r Frank McINTYRE, Chief of the Bureau."
Important reports on the Venezuelan Revolution.
Many troops besiege the mountains where the revolutionary forces have been interned.
Yesterday we greeted on board the steamer ' "CaraJis", which arrived from Venezuela, a distinguished citizen of that । country who rfjs made important mani- ■ festations about the attempted i revolution, conts: the power of President Gomez, effected by the Venezuelan General Peñalosa, expelled from his homeland since some years ago | for his ideas contrary to the present government of that Republic. The distinguished traveler, who begged us not to reveal his name, told us, because he does not want to mix with an important mission that is taking him to Europe, the political and ac- i tual issues of his country, began by talking about General Peñalosa: -This was one of the protégés of General Gomez. For years he has been out of Venezuela, because of his ideas against the Government. Nobody follows Peñalosa because he is a man without moral strength. - You give us the history of the latest events in Táchira-At the end of last month, a party of rebels dispersed on the border of Colombia and commanded by General Peñ^isa. attacked the Department of Venezuela closest to Colombia, Táchira, having reached Michelena, a small town in this region, which was only occupied by the civil authority. Immediately a comprima of the "Ricaute" battalion, which was stationed in Colon, was the only fucr:n that went out to fight them; and, a few hours later, Peñalosa and his men, left, hastily, fleeing, at the first shots, and fearing in the mountains of Prego ñero, former dens of evildoers. The assailants, in their flight, and as they passed through the Estación del Táchira and other places, committed all kinds of misdeeds, which proved that their only purpose was robbery. Among the companions of Peña# >- sa were the ringleaders of the surname Prato, who passed themselves off as prestigious persons; but these, on seeing their failure and being convinced that they could not get anyone to cover them, immediately crossed the border and took to flight. The bandits, in their flight, left some weapons in the places where they escaped in Venezuela, and others were captured by the Colombian authorities. "As for Peñalosa, he is now interned in the mountains of Pregonero, and it is very possible that the news of his capture will reach here, from one moment to the next, for all the authorities of the United States have been able to obtain the right to vote for him, and he has just now recommended the same measure to those belonging to religious orders. Plerce-Arrcw Automobiles We are pleased to advise that the PIERCE -ARROWs lately sold are now arriving, in case there are any who would like to see them. The PIERCE - ARROW is a car that not everyone can buy, because it is high priced, due to its high quality. z Its current price is between $9,000 to $10,000. - COME SEE THEM - PIETRANTONI & SO JO Pierce-Arrow Dept.' San Jaan, P. R.
The roads to Colombia, by which he could escape, are held by Government forces. With regard to the tranquillity and ga . rantia now enjoyed by the whole Republic, esbi is unshakable, to the extent that General Pé । rez Soto, President of the State of i Apure, a place suitable for these intent' ,nas, very near In frontier, and theater, it may be said, of these events, was at the * same date of these events, as he is today, strolling, very tranq ii .mind, in Caracas and in Ma i racaybo, without giving any importanIty to the facts. i Ta! perhaps at this hour already General PeuJosa is in the power of the Venezuelan troops. About 3,000 Government soldiers have besieged the mountains where the rebel is being held, preventing him from any possible escape, and he will surely fall into the hands of the rebels alive, because the President has expressed his desire that he should not be harmed. - Peñalosa's fight has been a purely systematic one. At this hour I do not know which government he wants for Venezuela. -We have been told that he sponsors Castro w Our informant smiled, irópit; mind.... WHAT ANOTHER CARACAS PA SAJERO TELLS US A young man from --pelLcj Alendo, who also travels in --! "Caracas" told us that the situation in Venezuela, according to his reports, was at this moment quite Uií iL The Government told us- has liett'd the censorship ha.ta < ' last limit. to hide from the mimd: what 'pie api is going on. As a result, not even in many cities in Venezuela is the state of the revolution in Táchira known. The notL-iis are being kept very secret, perhaps to avoid a revom cion in fi fornli- <. ? . -Yes. sir; according to reports Peñalosa is not alone He is accompanied by the Olivare, who are also eu Colombia, expelled from Venezuela. A p< i .r of censorship, po. - unofficial news, it is known that they have p '.¡ido raise a <"jr.trngente adic strong enough. --No. Peñalosa n') will be shot if he comes into the power of the Government. But he will go to jail which is worse. In his message to the nuns, the Cardinal praises the fact that the nuns are not obliged to vote, but that, in spite of everything, this is a right in which they participate like other women. The prelate concludes, recommending energetically to the nuns to make use of the electoral right that assists them, and to fulfill that duty. The buttons are pledged and lined. A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt. WE OFFER -J; Corrugated galvanized zinc LEGITIMATE ENGLISH ¿ Square twisted rods all dimensions. i COMPAÑIA INDUSTRIAL DE SANTURCE Pedro Bolivar S. en C. | BOX 250. TEL. 425. TWO TRUCKS FOR SALE in good condition. DEPOSITED IN HOUSE DB I J. OCHOA 4 HNO. ! San Juan, P. R.