THE AffllNDO
j 6 pages 3 ctvs. Semester. 84-0* i One year.
Oftcma" Salvador Brau. n Tel. 833 P. O. Box 341
MORNING NEWSPAPER.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
P SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO |
cublislied and distributed under permit (Mo. dUl> eumvn.ou Act of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office of San Jun for, Rico. By order of the Presidon*- a * Burleson Postmaster Uener-.
<- . cías" manar íeoruary ¿i. i -' e i Office ei San Juan, Porto Rico. (Unite** I "f America; andar the Act of march 8. 1878 |
I SATURDAY, JUNE 12, 1920.
YEAR II
| NUMBER 408.
Gompers predicts victory for the working class.
Samuel Gompers, president of the ¡"American Federation of Labor,'' disi citing problems connected with the : political and industrial situation in the United States, has made the sensational statement that financial interests are making investments of large sums of money to favor presidential candidates who are known to be enemies of the working class. "We are preparing for the con vention of the labor federation, which will take place on the seventh of June in Montreal," said Gompers, "and we are attaching great importance to matters connected with the national political league which has no par ticular commitments. "Reports which have been received from all over the nation indicate highly satisfactory progress in the campaign undertaken against the enemies of labor. We will work for the election of our friends. We will combat money with the firmest determination, and falsehood and deceit with truth 'We intend to cleanse the nation of all the political filth of which the present Congress has dared to boast, of the policy which ; has for its motto coercion and repre- ■ sion. I ' ' We have been able to ascertain that there is great resentment against the ; impotence of the government to reduce the ; high cost of living, a problem which deeply affects the lives of all i households in the nation. And we have prepared a broad and constructive program to solve this great problem. In many of the congressional districts we have thought it wise, in view of the character of the leading candidates, to support and elevate to power men who belong to the labor unions. And these candidates have bright prospects ahead of them and will triumph in the next election campaign. A man was found hanged in Santurce Yesterday morning was found hanged in Santurce Yesterday morning was found col-gapdc-^e^e^Jinir pahua,, behind the ^silo de Niños' of stop 19, on the grounds of Licenciado Torres Monge, the indiviRamón González. native of Lares. Ramon was a man about 29 years old. His occupation was an ice cream seller. After the investigation by the Prosecutor, he ordered that the corpse be buried, since it was a suicide. In the pockets of the suicide were found $1.08 and a notebook! The motives that induced Gonzalez to take such a grave resolution are completely unknown, since those who knew him say that nothing abnormal had happened to him. i It is assumed that Gonzalez had per' disturbed his mental faculties. BUBONIC PESTE MEXICO CITY, June 2.-In- , form of Veracruz that, according to official data, have been recorded a total of two- , ce cases of bubonic plague, three of them fatal. The following are the most important of these cases: - The government is taking severe measures to prevent the spread of the ¡plague. Cuba has armored itself not only against the Mexican sources, but also against those from New Orleans. i And in Puerto Rico.... ■ ■ ? WILSON A CINEMATOGRAPHER President Wilson during his illness has become a film buff. It has been a rare day since he began to leave his bedside that he has not attended the showing of a film or two. The President shows a marked ¡predilection for comedy and crime films.
CAMPAIGN TO REDUCE THE COST OF LIVING Dress Articles with 20% and 25% Discount. GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC. SANJUAN PONCE MAYAGUEZ
Schooner "PETRA" will depart on Wednesday 16th for Macoris and Santo Domingo. Admits cargo for the mentioned ports. For information: ANTILLES TRADING COMPANY. Office: Marina 14, in front of dock number 2. Receives cargo at all hours of the day.
Cotton fabric prices remain firm.
News from New York reports that the market is holding steady and merchandise, on the other hand, is in short supply. The general opinion in New York is that cotton fabrics will not go down for a long time. This is due to the numerous buyers who come to the New York market, many of whom have to return to their respective pal ses, unable to complete or make their purchases. As a logical consequence of this situation, there are no goods in existence at the present time, and if the factories were obliged to please the workers by paying them what they demand, the rise would inevitably fall on the buyers and consumers, who would be the most prejudiced. This indicates, of course, that there is no prospect at present, and everything leads one to believe that the market will remain the same and that prices will not go down in any direction. NEW YORK, June 3.-The Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Houston, in a speech at the Bond Club, made very interesting disclosures about the sugar shortage and the reasons for it. The : Secretary of the Treasury has stated I that the American people annually i mentally consume $1,000,000 worth of candy. j And yet he complains of a shortage of sugar. Mr. Houston stated that his estimates of the volume of "that national confectionery festival ' ' were based on the tax receipts ' for the current year. A BLIND MAN CHALLENGES TO RUN 250 MILES LOS ANGELES, (California), May 3L-A. singular challenge has been thrown down by Mariano A. Ayala, blind for ten years, who proposes to run the 250-mile distance between Los Angeles and Yama for a period of ten years in competition with any other blind man who accepts the challenge. f DF MARKET EXCHANGE DOLLARS (N. York) PAIR PESETAS 16 3(4 o¡o D LIBRAS 4.00 FRANCOS 57 1|2 o|o D MARCOS 3 3<4 ooD > LIRAS 60 o o o ; IVea a | ¡ FELIX LOPEZ I What do you need glasses or x eyeglasses, or to fix some of x , these? Then visit the Jewelry Shop of x i Felix Lopez, where in addition, if $! you need it, you will be recognized gra- $! tis sight. $ " i ■ | NOTICE í I I I TO OWNERS OF I AUTOMOBILES. ¡ | We are pleased to state j ■ ► : that henceforth we will not close núes I i | tra parts and accessories store i! : at noon, and we will have it abler f ¡ F ta from eight o'clock before meridian i = to six o'clock past meridian. 1 i é SANTIAGO A. PANZARDL Inc. I | San Juan, P. R. I i
Six stills A group of minefueron occupied ros succumbs tragiayer at Talleres camente en Bélgica
Internal Revenue inspectors, . accompanied by the Santurce police, yesterday, in the neighborhood of Talleres, . of Santurce, seized six stills, which had been installed in the mangroves. Several pipes of honey ■ and a gallon of alcohol were seized. Two individuals were arrested and bail was set at $250.00 by the Federal Court after investigation. The stills were installed in . a place as of a rope of ex- . tension, having the necessary means of . communication between one and the other Both the apparatus and the alcohol j . were taken to the Santurce Police Headquarters. i : A book by Carmela Eulate l --- Copies of the beautiful book "Canciones de Canciones" have begun to circulate in San ! Juan copies of the beautiful book "Can j tigas de amor'', translations of Arabic poems, which the excellent Puerto Rican writer Carmela Eulate, daughter of the bizarre Spanish admiral who fought heroically in the naval combat of Santiago de Cuba, and niece of our very dear friend Don Bernardino Sanjurjo, has written with notable skill. As the wise academic Mr. Rodríguez Marín says very well, in the beautiful prologue of the book, the illustrious traducto- ¡ ra, has known to overcome with great success, the enormous task of spreading the merit of many oriental poets, for what it makes to the most select thing that they have their guzlas in the touching thing to the love translating it faithfully, with their passionate exaltation, and even with what they are or they seem to us, mere extravagances. Mr. Rodríguez Marín, when speaking of Carmela Eulate Sanjurjo expresses himself thus: - * Daughter of an illustrious sailor covered with glory, with him she has resided in many par es. inside and outside Spain, but at first in Madrid, and her voice. the powerful voice of her culture and privileged intelligence , has been, therefore little less than 'voz clamantis in deserto'''. Carmela Eulate has instructed her understanding in books and travels: she knows several languages well; her spirit, extremely curious, has been able to see everything that the great panorama of the world has put on her horizon, and her exqui- i ¡ yes>m <euiperament of the world 1c v" na- i. The "Doll", "Disillusion", 'Bo- ¡ cetos de Novela' and "Marquis and Marquise", and in tasty stories such as the collection entitled "Profiles of Women", and in his books of character, "The Doll", "The Fa-i mile of Robredo", "Disillusion", 'Bo- ¡ cetos de Novela' and "Marquis and Marquise", The Board of Directors of the Association of Government Employees instilled the desire to publicly express its appreciation to the members of the Chamber of Deputies of the Government of the United States of America; The Board of Directors of the Government Employees' Association shall publicly express its appreciation to the members of the House and Senate for having passed the resolution by which they have resolution' by virtue of which the salaries of all ; employees of the public offices, i without distinction of category, have been increased. In a frank manner EL MUNDO ' echoes the recognition of the government employees and sends to the legislators a vote of grace. IMPORTANT RESOLUTION OF THE CUBA SUGAR INDUSTRY. - HAVANA, June 3.-The sugar growers have agreed to congratulate the Cuban Minister in Washington, Carlos Manuel de Céspedes, for his brilliant management in favor of sugar in the great Antilles. The same sugar growers intend to hold meetings against the intended seizure of the next harvest. CLANDESTINE CIGAR FACTORY. Inspector Hess of Internal Revenue, ■ yesterday denounced an individual of Santur ce, who was engaged in the clandestine manufacture of cigars. The matter, already in the hands of the Municipal Court, is under i thorough investigation by i those officials. . f CIVIL ENGINEER To serve as assistant to the Civil Engineer and Surveyor of an Agricultural-Industrial Corporation. In applying for the position give as much information as possible, especially as to your experience and education. Also state your desired salary. Address to "Civil Engineer" C. O. "EL MUNDO". Advt. | FOR SALE I 5 A tolar in the Malecon, Marina X X 2800 meter" square" ' ► X Will inform: ' * i | A. TIRADO Íh X P. O. Box 217. San Jaan, P. R. ¡ ¡ ¡ ¡
< By Cabio Franete) CHARLEROI, June 1L- One of the elevators used to descend ¡ to the Charlineau coal mine broke down and killed six workers by falling into one of the shafts. - í - PARIS, June 11.-In discussing in < the Chamber the budget of the navy , French, Bignon, Secretary of the Depar- : tment of the Navy, made the statement that shortly the fleet, which was before the war of 2,650,000 tons, would have at its disposal, a t°- 1 nelaje of 3,500 000, in spite of the per 1 losses suffered during the war with Germany. < VILLEFRANCHE, June 11.- The American cruisers "Pittsburg" and "Talbott", which were in port in this port, have continued their voyage after having made a supply of coal and provisions. ' ROME, June 11.-King Victor Ma ] nuei has granted an audience to the statesmen Giolitti, Puis. Salandra, Luz ( zatti, Rossi and Luigi in order to proceed ( to the formation of Cabinet BERLIN, June 11.-The government has < sent to the allied nations the official note by which Germany accepts the reduction of the military troops which it aspired to raise to two hundred thousand men. \ LONDON, June 11. In accordance with the requirements of the Treaty of Versailles, the Allies will occupy in succession the right bank of the Rhine for a distance of fifty miles, and will reduce their defense elements to ten battalions of infantry, five squadrons of cavalry and one battery. The warden of the municipal jail of San Juan, Don Pedro Parég Viera, was summoned to share before the public prosecutor DíáíZ'Cbnzxo íoft'íh Atf * ' car an investigation, to know for certain, what were the moti- d vos that determined the escape of the confined Félix Salcedo, qne extinguished with r dena for theft. s When questioned by the Public Prosecutor's Office, Mr. Parés stated that Salcedo had escaped due to the state of abandonment of the prison building; that on several occasions he had drawn the attention of the municipal administration to this matter, and that he had always been told that there was no money to make the prison a prison building. After so many announcements regarding the union between the Conservatives and Zayas, it seems to be a fact that the group led by Dr. Zayas will not form a coalition with the Conservatives and will go to the polls alone. '' However, there are those who believe that ' ' ' - benevolent that for the con- , , ! servatism has assumed the head of the t . popular, leads one to expect that the latter will re- , i force the Montalvistas, when ' the time comes to vote. <
The hearing of a ! case in the District Court.
For last Thursday was scheduled the hearing of the indictment against Johann D. Stubbe. for a forgery offense. The defendant appeared assisted by his attorney Cayetano Coll Cuchi who requested the adjournment of the hearing with the opposition of the Assistant District Attorney. After extensive discussion, Judge Rossy declared the defense counsel's motion to be granted and ordered that the case be heard yesterday at nine o'clock in the morning. In accordance with Thursday's resolution, the trial began yesterday, and the Jury that was to hear the case began to be formed. The Acting Prosecutor called Mr. Pomaies, as an expert, to indicate the entries and pages of the books, in which the alleged falsifications had been committed. Mr. Coll Cuchi opposed to the presentation of the accounting books contained in the alleged forgeries. Judge Rossy declared the objection of the defense admissible, and the Prosecutor refused to enter the hearing of the case, without being allowed the assistance of a person to indicate the pages of the accounting volumes that he intended to present as evidence. The hearing of the case was suspended until further notice. ANOTHER DONATION FOR THE SANATORIO INSULAR The Estate of J. Serrallés, owners of the "Central Mercedita" of Ponce, has sent to Dr. Ruiz Soler. Commissioner of Health. S2,500, coi io donation for the construction of a booth, in their name, at the Sanatorio Insular. Dr. Ruiz Soler has replied expressing his appreciation for such generous cooperation. The "Flying Squad" of the New York Department of Justice has begun efforts to compel grocery dealers to offer to the public the sale of wholesale price reductions on the aforementioned items. I In view of*W abuses by some traders, strong measures will be taken. It is said that wholesale prices which suffered a decline ' will still follow the trend started, as large consignments continue to be received in the market. COMMERCIAL Messrs. "D. Vivaldi and Co. S. en 1 C. ", of Yauco, have renewed their contra- ¡ to social with the same character as the previous one, and have bought the parti- ' cipation held by Don Jose M Vivaldi. GPAN MITIN UNIO NISTA EN PONCE According to our Corres- ¡ ponsal. next Thursday a great Unionist rally will be held in that city, for which splendid preparations are being made. With the above-mentioned meeting the political struggle in Pon-1 ce begins; and, on that occasion, great en- 1 tusiasm reigns there. The most conspicuous speakers of the Unió nis'.a party will take the floor, including, among others, Mr. Hernández López and Mr. Miguel Guerra.
P. SCHIRA & CO. REDUCING The High Cost of Living. The New York market has dropped considerably. Wanting to help our clientele to reduce the high cost of living, we have decided to make a sale. Ladies Suits 25X Men's and Children's Suits, Cashmere 25X Palm Beach Suits 1 5th or BIG SALE P. SCHIRA & CO. San Juan, Pto. Rico.
Three times Santos Chocano could have been lynched.
i The United States Minister to Guatemala, Mr. Benton McMillin, ■ has cabled that to prevent a possible attack on former President I Dr. Manuel Estrada Cabrera, who is being held in prison, it has been necessary to change his place of detention three times. The mob has tried three times to destroy the prison in order to lynch all the captives, among whom is the poet Santos Chocano. This, as the Minister adds in his cablegram, will appear before a war council for the crime of sedition; ' but he will not be executed, not even a long imprisonment will be imposed on him as a punishment. The Guerrero-Mendoza Company eo Noeva York It is already taken for granted that the Guerrero-Mendoza Company will begin to perform in New York next November, contracted by Mr. Morris Gest. The Company will tour some of the most important cities in the United States. It will stage 24 of the best plays by Spanish playwrights, and the performances will be in Spanish. THE JUDICIAL POWER WILL DECIDE ON CHOCANO HAVANA. May 30.-The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, Mr. Luis Pedro Aguirre, has responded to the request qu^ with numerous signatures addressed from this capital to the President of that republic, Carlos Herrera. in favor of Santos Chocano, saying that the executive power cannot intervene in the acts of the judicial power, that the courts will judge Chocano and that the president and his ministers will not be able to do anything else but abide by and comply with the decision obtained in the matter. That telegram, as can be seen, is similar to the one received in Arecibo by the people who arranged for the poet's freedom. "!!CIR Last cablegram received from Nuera Y ork: "Offers have been made for sugar from Puerto Rico at $20 50. Buyers offer to pay at $20.00 The market is firm at this last quotation." AC ONTECIMIENTO Durant e los dias domingo 13, lunes 14 y martes 15 de junio s° exhibirá en el ■TEATRO CIUE VICTORY G "RDEH^ 1 la famosa cinta LOS ARLEQUINES DE SEDA Y ORO ~ Tragicomedia cinematográfica de i La vida nacional, dividida en treq épocas, en la que se refleja el mi del cielo de España, sus fiestas biza rras y sangrientas, sus hombres gne- . rreres y sus amores trágicos. Creation of the eminent tragic couplet. idol of the public RAQUEL MELLER in the role of "GITANILLA BLANCA". i M?'-tíficas bullfights by' Gtllo, GillHo, Gaona and Belmonte" Three epochs whose titles are: ' El NIDO DESHECHO. The SEED OF THE PHENOMENON THE VOICE OF THE BLOOD ' accompanied each era of an excellent comedy. Ask for subscription prices and order the separation of your seat at the box office of the VICTORY GARDEN, or phone 590 Santurce. To be thrilled, to have fun. DO NOT FORGET
1 Empty Bags i - X v ¡i i i x ec? l?n | O f S je new empty bags 44" x 28". X ! X | for 250 !bs. Immediate delivery from warehouse in San Juan. | 4 Miguel Morales * f Tetuan 18, San Juan, j I I í I Steamer "TUWETANKA" | f Will leave about the 14th for í | JACKSONVILLE, FLORIDA j o Applications for cabins will be received f Besosa & Stebbins, Sues. | o Telephone 301, Tetuan 33.
Hindenburg forced war with the United States.
The secret protocols of the submarine war, which have just been published, include an account of the conference which took place at Pless on January 9, 1917, between Marshal Hindenburg, General Ludendorff and Admiral Von Holtzendorff, which was also attended by other senior naval officers. At this conference Admiral von Holtzendorff was in favor of unrestricted submarine warfare, which did not arouse much interest in Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg and Emperor Wilhelm. Bethmann Hollweg was in favor of preparing diplomatically to prevent the United States from entering the war at all costs, and the opinion prevailed in the Foreign Office that if the United States entered the war, the whole of South America would surely lean to the side of the Allies. Von Holt zendorff said: -What shall we do if the Chancellor should oppose our designs? -That is precisely what worries me," answered Hindenburg. -Then it would be advisable for you to take charge of the Chancellery. Marshal. -That is impossible, because I do not have the right to speak in the Reichstag, but we will march together, because it is necessary. There is no choice but to prepare for a war with the United States, things cannot get worse than they are. The war must be shortened in any way. -The most serious thing in the matter," said Holtzendorff, "is that the Emperor is not well aware of the situation and does not know very well the true sentiments of the German people, we must call them the aristocracy of labor, made up of the highest ranks of the proletariat. This eminently capitalist country is, consequently, some decades behind its neighbors as far as the proletarian revolution is concerned. France crushed at sn time the vigor of the proletarian revolution during the two hermcSs* msúrrec^iief revolutions raised without success in eighteen hundred and forty-eight and in eighteen hundred and seventy-seven. But not for that, such revolutions ceased to be milestone stones of importance in history. In the year 1870. Germany, which lagged far behind France and England in economic development, took over the leadership. ! in spite of this, the leadership of the international labor movement. When Germany caught up with its rivals in commerce and industry, shortly before the war, the splendidly organized workers' party had fallen under the "control" of a party of the most despicable traitors in history, who sold out ignominiously to capital. Scheidemann, Noske, David, Legien. i and all those who follow them, will go down in history as the most odious persecutors of the working classes, as servile slaves of monarchy and reaction. When Karl Kautsky was still a disciple of Marx, before he disavowed his faith to become a defender of Schei ■ demann and bourgeois democracy against the "soviets" of the proletariat he wrote an article entitled ' 'Slaves i of the Revolution". He analyzed the historical con' ditions which could make possible the transfer of "control" of the international revolutionary movement to "the slaves". (Continued on page 3).