ELMUNDO
। Office*; " | Salvador Brau. 8T | I Trt. 833 P. 0. Box 345 |
1® pages 3 ctvau ÚbtekfFJO
' DAILY'MORNING,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ANO ir
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (No. 8U1) sathorized 1 Art of octobor 6. 1917. on Ue at the Post Often of San Juan. Rieo Br order of the President. A. 8. Burlmnn. Pool ■Qatar O
t Entered a - second class mattar. fiber 2^17, 1919, at the Past Oflco at San Jaan. Porto Bieo, (United ♦ States of America) nadar tko Aet of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY I7DE^BRIL 1920. f
NUMBER 360.
Puerto Rico-says Canndn-must stand on its own. Mr. Upshaw defends the island with great fortitude.
The Puerto Rico Rural Appropriations Act Important speeches by Mr. Cannon and MiADpsha* in the United States Congress.
I ; At the session "|e| April seventh i roiniuuuroii in the House of Re- . presenters of the United States Uii- , d""s the debates ettu occasion of I - " amendments introduced to pr -y-c < > "le law No. to make ex'e,;. ( ' siva to Puerto Rico the Rural Credit Act < ' ■ ditos Rurais. Old -Joe Cannon is taking the stage to fight! 1 ■'bilí" and have before the Comar: i.i' following n< inifestacioues. ("Mr. President: This lev * c1 । ne to extend the " áuJ stilus of the Rii' :.- - - les Appropriations Act to Puerto Rico. To my way <i - ; ender. already from three to four million "le dolare^ ' have been loaned to ¡ American citizens on the mainland through the intermediary of the ' banks ereado> by the law. E- . i law has been the subject of "le. severe vy,_ I tics on several occasions. I : te in favor of it upon its passage "- Even in the Care States, a - -- 1 sar of the guarantees "foot have te'. ned the loans, these lian been censured, right here in vs_ , tos Ltmgresionalvs. seats. soste. ' ning the critics t |i¡e they were not "'staid 'authorized by "d spirit of the law. and it has even been said "pie the lands "leí (leste, "leí South and North had si "I"" practically sold to the Federal Board of i Rural Credits at prices which ex . eededed their fair value. I do not believe 1 that such a claim has good futí dameuto mi some cases, but in . ¡gNrmteíi i i ■Métete' pnpfitft tends to extend loans to Puerto Rico. S". alleges that ■ citizens of Puerto Rico sou citizens of the Cuidos States. It is true. The citizens of the Samlwieh Islands are also citizens- of the United States, but I understand "pie the territorial government "le those islands has introduced a Rural Credit Act of its own, totally divorced from i ours. I have been told "pie the legislature of Puerto Rieo passed" . one. but "pu- it was vetoed by the , Governor- Pue "le be "pie we have authority, and it is even posi ble "pie we have "pu* to extend to Puerto Rico the law. and to that I do not object, but if it happens- ■ de. The United States is responsible for the loans made in that island, which means that if there are losses, all the United States "bailees" who are under the law will have to help to pay them. Each of them will have to try to support himself. I have a Syrian and the warmth of ! ( affection in my heart for Puerto Rico. That town was founded before ours. I have been there three ■ times, and have seen a favoi change. -- - - - CENTRAL HOTEL . I J = .; I SOON TO OPEN | ti " San Jom No. 12 r । s 2 l'B Sen Jkmn, Pto. Ricb s r i í s É Ñíaziiiiriíi^^ E I; NOTICE £ £ £ ; V "adMto>, to eatrefa ah " > ¡ tmiMr the preserte zafra, J * ; EIGHT mmUFUGES HEP- J I I n WORTH Je 3T' CM teezda- í t J J ¡ Aar Je 7M p. c. rapan Jad y J * : ; Báqatea Statehré ir x 18" | t 4e la Heastaa Scanroad aad | J i; CaaMe, estaada ea perfect 1 J ; estada and faarieaaada ea | £ i ; aaeslra theatrical Hatada, Bar- ] t i catearte, deade paedea vene ¡ I ; eateearía tabre tes ■¡mas. : t ; Dirqa sa alert a seKtitad d^ ¡ t । ¡ data to the affirms of this ; í : Citopatta ea Sao Jaaa, P. R. ¡ 5 -Taata Na. 2, Apt Na. 748 | - SaJuM-L Mamni92l : f i HiznIi Sagv Ca.
I rabie id progBEsb ultimammite. The terrenwWc.Puerto Rico is-1 . táu in inanodRpt many cases.' of people q*-obtained con-' cessions in ti^K^os of the Spanish colony" regimeMy The inhabitants ' have not cabiad<vWutho. although they have made some progressbut still have oporíunidarote*'to progress and improve their ^Kditions. I am willing í^HMihr a bill qu<- authorize theWBfeblecimiénto of a feder^^BL bank agricultural loans -■olas, but not willing, teJ nieu.Jo the distmBL that separates Puerto Rico ddSkntinente, that : - We shall be responsible in all places in the United States which are under the protection of the RUMTE Appropriations Act for any losses which may be incurred by extending the Itep to that country. Puer"<" Ric"" m^Stá in such good condicioue&jwmo the United States i . United States, even cw|o they have! .better carreteilp^y have progressed a good deal, dw ' ,'Qu"- we have Mpho for Port; i Rieo.' Their tobaccoSU'rafé. their fru- ' ' ; tos. have entni(-"free in the Es i ! tado.s United States. '^Hjpay a single | , i cent "le der "qKbs. We have, exi- ' gido tributes to the entire iateido soi on the produefadMe Puerto Ricb. J who do not pay coáHRiution in núes j i 1111111111 Mp i iiiiiijii' 1 ■ ' X : : TODAY SATURDAY TODAY -- i::: * ■' - " p: Nora Taloidp I ' In d drama in S acts ¡;: "THE EMPTY HOUSE" ;; j ' r the 4th episode of . . LAHUELLAdel HORROR'::: j.. Tomorrow Sunday 18 Ata Naziam . . ■ ' . > famous pink tr&sica in the master ' ' ' ■ - donor drama eu 8 sensational acts ^'HOVUS OF WAR" :: ; _ ■ - - ' ■ > Prices and Tandas those of * I ; custom. T1I I-I1 I I I t-l I I I I I I 1 I-i l-H I I I I ¡ 1 I 1 I 1 F The Bel "Matized" epidemic of sugar cane z| 8a complete and rapid desapa ricióa i¡eqn the discovery Tails - Seno. |The most serious problem facing our sugar industry today is definitely loose and everywhere. Knowledge of the morbid causative í and transmitting medium of the disease, i Absolute mastery of loe miamos. S Not a single coya more will be sowed in J mu farms. ' I I I I Removal of plaii tari tari tari tari aa. I í ñas, free permanent entonto of the en9 fermedad using cuatonrotaca variodta. S of seeds, even the mis teceptibkh, & as "cristalina" | da" ete.- ! The application of the proeedimient" MB 9 cectazá diners because the atsnomirado I in desyerbes 7 crops to levantarae In K planting asna, which "óerra't more i soon, will pay for it with cneeso^ remain. * do full profit the immense dL । frrence of production between a healthy and ' a diseased plantation? Sugar growers who would like to obtain information on this important matter may contact me by mail or by phone at my office at Cruz No. 33, Mí; San Juan, ' Fuerto Bies. 2, DEL SENCL; -^Métete /J _ i ■
, behind customs. Esc is a great prií vilegiu. for it must be kept in euen 1 ta that Puerto Rieo produces much tobacco, much sugar- Eu 1 "j that respects its inhabitants, I think they march pretty well and I have no pie tiras to throw at them. The Indians have disappeared- There are whites, ne gros and mestizos, and they are of good disposition. A representative told you the other day that Puerto Rico had helped us win the war. Yes. it did, and I am as responsible as any other member of Congress that that country will help us with its regime. I was the Speaker of this House when the attempt was made to remove the regiment from Puerto Rico, but we managed to defeat the proposition. The regiment became a great regiment. It is well disciplined. It is well fed, the soldiers are brave and all that. The crown! Townshend, son "le a farmer I member of Congress, "foot has vi- 1 1 1 vido on the island for space of 25 | ■years. । ? i deserves our recognition- i I I cimiento. The regiment was in Panama. It is a great regiment, no doubt about it, and I take my hat off to it. It is not better than our regiments of the Continentals, but it is as well prepared to fight as ours, and rendered great service in Panama during the war- I wish to state, measuring my words, that during our visit to the island we encountered much hysteria. But they treated us well and cleaned our hats when we got there. The initiator of that fut" trip was the current chairman of the Island Affairs Committee, - a man of great ability, a great patriot. All kinds of requests were made to us and we sponsored them. We saw banners with banners "standing for the right of self-determination at various points on the island. On some of these banners we read inscriptions that read: "We want to be independent. That was the cry of one of the political parties- The banners of another read thus. "That we should remain united with the United States," They are under the power of the United States and we have to answer for them. But let me tell you something. We have to answer for Cuba, since she wrote in her constitution that if she did not obey the law and order was disturbed we would have the right to intervene. We have already had to return after having them (Continued on 3rd. page.) PASAGE PABA NEW YOBK I exchange two passages da primexp qad I have in "4 Coamo pan on May 5 for two passages on any steamer <leaving before that date. Véasp with me. Helen W. Courtois, 31 Plaza Prin cipaL Advt. ♦< " I "H44f " "1 -I"! ; | Bañil Suits i; ♦ . for :: I SRAS.-Catetes- Rlltt::: J Acahunter of r "scil>ir m - - t nine and vertedo surtid" i í | deTtAJES4#tlASZAFA- :: | niLA^MEDIA^ and demé" H J items for use in "! í the Hague. I Ask us for what you need ¡; Ifintiln Win Ce. ;; | IRC. t suau, ÍMCE, MYttNI U TeSMsWh ffaeÍMSSM ! I !"""!■
If the next S. Remo conference fails.
B - (T* Oble Hpcée) LONDON, April 16.-The Parisian newspaper "Echo de Paris" states that the San Remo conference will deal mainly with the si- : tuation in Germany and the occupation of Frankfort. Then, the critical Adriatic question, which appears to be full of complications, for if the commitments are respected, there will be a struggle between conflicting interests on the part of Italy and Serbia. CRITICAL SITUATION IN CENTRAL AMERICA - ; WASHINGTON, April 16.-The state of affairs in some Central American Republics is very distressing, particularly in Guatemala, where students made a hostile demonstration against General Estrada Cabrera, President of the Republic. The "Gace- : te.de Franckfort" declares that the army under the orders of the German government has committed extremely serious acts of indis-: ■egxAte^wMftbóNBnations. has Mtió protipitatenente for SBNTENl 'l A REVIN A DA In the raso "le Genaro Márquez Roig vs- Sucesores "le Abarca in claim for damages and perjutetos for breach of contract, the Supreme Court has just "le reversed the judgment of the former judge Mr. T"--xidor in ia District Court, of clarifying without place the claim. The prestigious Mr. Soto Gras was the attorney for the plaintiffs. i
The Department of Agriculture and Labor will inaugurate its immersion tank on Sunday, the 18th of this month at ten o'clock before noon. Said tank is located at the entrance of Utuado, near Arecibo. By means of this notice, the cattlemen who wish to have their animals without ticks, are invited to send them to be bathed. * The bath is free - Advt.
le that Mr. Taylor tells the Ledo. Guerra Mondragon The L-do. Miguel Guerra Mondragon received yesterday from Washigton an enthusiastic letter from Rep. Taylor, who has recently visited Puerto . Rico. We publish below a paragraph of the said letter, which we believe to be of great interest, in view of the topicality of the matter to which it refers. The paragraph reads as follows: "Since my return to Washington I have had the pleasure of conferring several times with Mr. Córdova Dávila. concerning his bill to make the "National Rural Credit Act" applicable to Puerto Rico, and I know that you and other Puerto Ricans will be pleased to learn that the bill passed the lower house yesterday, April 7, by a majority vote of 193. 19 deputies voted against it, but even these did not, it may be said, í against the Act itself- but because they favored an amendment introduced [ in the bill by Representative í Wingo, and their votes were no more j than a mere courtesy to Mr. Win- ■ g". who was not opposed to the bill, i I am sure that such an Act will be of i great benefit to the agricultural interests of Puerto Rico. I was very glad to take advantage of the opportunity offered me to make a short speech of five minutes in favor of the bill. which appears on page 5723 of the "Congressional Record" for *1*7th of this month "whose. eqpta, tWígo-^rgu^^^ I will send you*. REGISTRATIONS MADE IN BAYAMON (By telegraph.) / Bayamon. April 11. THE WORLD. San Juan. Registrations began today with the following result: Republicans 203. Socialists 175. Unionists 93. complete order. The Correspondent.
i Being on the eve of the Inventory of our stock we have decided to reduce considerably the prices of an infinity of articles such as blouses, skirts, hosiery, objects for gentlemen, trunks, suitcases, perfumery, china and glassware, and on this occasion we invite our clientele to take advantage of the economy of prices that we offer. "THE BOYS" SUCCESSORS OF A. MAYOL CO. San Juan, P. R. AdvL
- h| 1 1 1 1 1 f til " | tW 1111 I I I I I I I I 11 11 11 1 I 1 1 1 WH 111>1 1 1 IIH1 I 1 1 1 i 1 L La. INDIA" crawl " | Will deapurberate on Tuesday 1 20 dd current for San í Pedro de Macona and Sto. Domingo. I - ii~r c "T* - <*d*a "M "Ha í ANTILLES TRADING CO. J > Tatífaua 1042. Oficia* f reate al 1 SPRING NO. 2 4 ' । ti lilililí 11 11 11 111 11 11 H H H I 11 ll-m ! i I-I I I I I I I I Wl 1H1! . MM- M W" W" W1"। W" I - M "***< í WÓO "0>04 1 II t 4 :: Vapor France" "CARAVELLE" j :: Expected at any moment with 4 i; destination Puerto Plata, R. D. - Cabo Hai- ; i ti^nn and Port-au-Prince. Will admit passage 1 and drop for said ports. : L BEHN BROTHERS. INC., Agents i : : : NdMátelT "IíMl T^fwezsr. 1 V ' x - 4 láüí ' i?* '
Berlin press rejoices over alleged failure.
An indictment for violating the prohibitionist law * Francisco I'antaleon, appeared ! yesterday before Commissioner William : Fable, charged with violating the law "le the prohibition. This charge was brought by Cpl. Soldcvila, and, according to the statements of the said public officer. ' while he and two other policemen were on duty in the Gnndulito suburb of Puerta de Tie ¡ rra, his attention was attracted by a smoke coming from the Panta león residence, which gave him the odor of honey. 1 and out of curiosity he immediately ordered the other police officers to surround the house, going to the entrance, requesting permission from the owner to enter the interior rooms, which Pantaleón allowed without making any kind of resistance, since Pantaleón was suffering from a fever that was devouring him for minutes. Soldevila found in the kitchen of the house a still, very well set up, with all its accessories working, which had been built by Pantaleon, who is a very good tinsmith. The police asked him several questions, to which Pantaleon did not give an answer, perhaps due to the seriousness of his illness at the time, as he was in a critical situation. He told the missionary Mr. Fable that he had built the apparatus for the purpose of distilling alcohol to make certain fever-relieving medicines. j} After hearing the defendant's evidence, the Commissioner set bail at $200: and the defendant not having satisfied the same, he was ordered to be committed to the galleys adjoining the jail, where he will remain until the Grand Jury shall reconvene, at which time the indictment with all the evidence in the case will be returned to him. THERE WAS NO SESSION There was no session in the Municipal Court, nor will there be one today because it is an inccfiption day. and
(By French Cable) PARIS, April 16.-The newspapers of the German capital affirm with true jubilation that France is completely alone in enforcing the clauses of the Versailles Treaty. FALSE RUMOR i AMSTERDAM, April 16.-The newspapers deny that the former Empress of Germany is dying, as was said. Augusta Victoria is still perfectly well in the castle of Amerongen. FRANCE WANTS TO ACTIVATE ITS UNION WITH BELGIUM i PARIS April 16.-The head of the French Government, Mr. Millerand, has instructed the French Ambassador in Belgium to activate with all haste the alliance between the two countries. EMBARKATION OF A MINISTER PARIS, April 16.-The diplomatic Minister of Colombia left Bordeaux, via Haiti, for BoLOS SOLDIERS POBTOERIQVE, WE ARE GOING TO THE UNITED STATES j Forty-two Puerto Rican soldiers will leave next month for the United States, with the purpose of taking part in the Olympic Games of the great Republic. ' e SHOTS IN VEGA ALTA José Seijo fired three shots di' pis I tola at José Hernández, wounding him in i a leg. This event occurred in the <alh- di! Muñoz Rivera, Vega Alta. The motive was a political leaf in which some comments were made, which led to a heated discussion between J and Hernandez.
|| THE TRUCK | RIKER-LOCOMOBILE | . I | In honor of the First President of the ' So " ? ?? " Society of Automotive Engineers and " <$ " member of the Naval Board of Consultation of >> " the United States " I MR. A. L. RIKER | " Vice President and Chief Engineer of the " " LOCOMOBILE CO. OF AMERICA :> and designer of the worm gear of our " " " " " trucks, - our cargo vehicles of " " ;> this make - bear his name. When the "Locomobile Co. of America", - " " " . " factory of world-wide reputation- has " ¡* put on its trucks the name RIKER, " J , it is because it considers it a new honor for its trucks? | Remember that the Riker-Locomobile is the best truck built in America. " " Í THE ií I ] Union Commercial Corporation 1 1 ¡ a ; AUTOMOBILE DEPARTMENT " " ; " Comercio St. 29-31 | | | > ¡K < ' San Juan, P. R. " y