ELM&XDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester. $<.00 One year. $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS.
AM ■ |
SAN JUAN, PUERTO KICU
Jet "f "ctober A 1"1T. in #le "t the Poet Otteo ef dea Jua, Perm 1 Rieo. By order ef the Preaideoh A * Borleooo, Peetnastar GmeraS.
| " Nutered a ■ Sása wttT, februsry Si, 1 *" M the Pos" Qfneo 'a" 8 as Juan, Porto Rieo, (ünite* IJ tHotes of Antortea) under the jáet of moreh >, 1878
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 2, 1920.
1920. | NUMBER 502
- FOUR PEOPLE SPOKE TO THE BOMB CONDUIT" AFTER THE EXPLOSION.
(DB THE NEW YORK PRESS) Baymand Brown, foreman of the Albert A. Volk and Co. house, and three other men were summoned to Marshal Brophy's office to testify about the Wall Street bombing, and their statements give a new version of the origins and origin of the explosion. These witnesses agree that five hundred days after the explosion they found a man who said that "the driver of the wagon which had been swept away and whose horse was lying dead" in the street said that he had arranged to deliver some materials to an individual on Wall Street. He adds that when he arrived at the ski na Lompeeiwl first realized that the address he had was insufficient and went to a nearby telephone to ask the man who had employed him for a more precise address at which he was to unload. While ertebq on the horn of the telephone ocn tried the explosion and went outside to eur.ar.tiAj that his wagon had vanished - ncide and he horse was dead in 'the street. * In the general excitement the man said that he separated from the driver, and that at that moment he had neither his wagon nor his horse with the cause of the explosion was described as Clark and the worker as talking to a foreign accent which seemed to be spoken by a German or a Pole. The testi- ' gao die* that he was dressed in blue and e" ba* ased the suit, and that nothing I made it appear that the worker that knew [ le who Rosaba the wagon. *. Iskmbbpíz* S itens MK^eW^ne "te *bmnhn par* <* Slot the pump and without ante knew the nature of the load*. Di adele a direction u^Jmpir cisa this would ensure that the necessary information would come pa while so to graduated the mechanism for the infernal machine to explode. These men claim that there are examples of contractors transferring dynamite from one place to another without special permission and putting into use any wagon they could find on the street for this purpose. Tomorrow these tests will appear before the jury hearing the case. Marshal Brophy believes that he has succeeded in adding something to what the jury has learned from other sources, and even that the latter will be more definite information than anything previously gathered.
A BISHOP PI OF THE CUBAS TO MARRY CAIfeO. - There has occurred here n atrio Bisgusto between the cu- < na of the city, led by the Bishop. which call for the abolition of i celibacy catre tes clergymen and other re . tana* of igd* nature. M Bishop was tried pop wq TriBdasttetáco and sentenced to per mamocte three afies in the desert, h . ¡ " DB CENTRAL AMERICA i ' I: m ■"Manatí Calvo" brought, among others wé^ tea aUbl-íM passengers: Lañe rattet, Octavio Martin* Gustav* Arenar,, Montes W. Purria. Carlos * raadi. ranoaes Arce. AuA "a Arce. Ptaomteen Arce, Maño Arce, Mi*el Ro frig*, Jocó A Gonsález. Napatefa La gamo, Bmtedíe Laguna, David Arape. Mfctot Fila Gustavo Marín. Eva Marta. Joaquín Balasch y e Ignacio An- 1 ' _______ i MAs fe "testos Rn¡ ImHIk ilfctrias O*nn * las da cristal psrqns no as - uaBtnáan. na as rónqpsn y dan más cía - fe - Illi III Ofe WHOLESALE
fe $
- i STAEDARD PRINTING - WORKS " bqnat ds high quality fe* La* dA Tat 5*8 San Juan, P, K
! sonas whose statements have been he- । ch^ already in the public domain. Federal agents in Brooklyn j received a warning in an anonymous postal i that the Bro' oklyn post office would be the target of an analogous | attack on Saturday n 12.15 o'clock. All measures will be taken, but it is believed that this is a lie analogous to the postcard about the customs office. A communication from Brenton, New Jersey, says that another warning has been received ea the municipal building ' in which it is more or less stated that if ! the owners do not let the poor houses of? capadas, they will send J all to hell. All the federal agents, the police and countless other secret agents continue, each in his own way. It is believed that this method of independent investigations will shed some light on the data already possessed, for the statements so far made, outside of the latest version, are considered to be very vague conjectures about what happened. The lairs of known anarchists in the city are also being investigated in a special manner, and in many instances traced, not only in New York, but also in some western cities and in the Atlantic states. - By virtue of an ' appeal having been made to all those persons , who hubieain found pieces of i metal , wood , or any other des । perdice caused by the explosion . I have constantly gained many _and very r varied to the police stations, i cv "il proves that there were quite a few co lectio ners. ■ - . and - ■ dr AUTOMDVIIES "COLE AERO-EIGHT" We are receiving by steamer "Hden" a consignment of two, four and seven passenger COLE AERO EIGHT automobiles, which we offer ready for delivery on Wednesday the 6th of.October BOBINQUEN TRADING CORPORATION BUILDING BELAVAL i Tanca No. 2 - - - Tei. 1104 , Garage Stop 17, Santurce ■ SAN J|XAN. P. R.
GORKI DENIES THE ATROCITIES OF THE "SOVIETS" LONDON, September 26.- The atro ; cities and crimes attributed to the ' ' ' Bolshevikis ' ' ' by the press of America and Europe, are denied by the following letter, from the eminent writer Maximo Gorki, addressed to the English novelist Wells. "In April - says Gorky - the "Lon ¡ don Times" published the impressions of an Englishman who spent several days in Rasta. Among other statements, he said that the "Bolshevik" armies were indulging in crime and plunder, turning Russia into a center of hatred and perversion. All* this is absolutely false," says Gorky, "and shows a perfect ignorance of Russian affairs. Believe me. I am afraid, Wells," adds the great literati, "that we Russians have not yet reached that state of unworthy cannibalism which the civilized press of Europe echoes. "'Allow me now to speak to you of ' Leníne. It has been said in the same "Lon don Times" that Leníne surrounds himself with nr. = Asiatic raptor, semi-barbarian. There is no such thing. That, like the other, is und ; iniquitous invention. Leníne is a puritan and lives in a seneiAn way in the Kremlin, neither more nor less than when he lived in Paria. He is a great man and an honest man." License to hunt M lenv|iTÍB Executive has issued a license to hunt and fire guns to dolF José feurand.
German warships left for Dunkirk (BY ENGLISH CABLE) PARIS, October 1. -The German warships "Koenigsberg", "Regensgurs", "Kolberg" and "Stralsberg" have sailed from Kiel and Scapa Flow Bay. "Kolberg" and "Stralsund', the tulles have been ceded to the French Republ: ea by agreement concluded in tre M- Milierand and the government of Ita lia, which disputed very bitterly the possession of the referred ships. The Austrian cruiser "Novato", which was also ceded to France, will leave at any moment for Marseilles. THE ITALIAN PAVILION HAS BEEN TREED IN KIEL. LONDON, October 1.- This morning in the German port of Kiel, before a commission of the Allies, the act of hoisting Italian flags was carried out on the combat ships which belonged to the former German Empire and were ceded to Italy. From one moment to the next, protected by Italian destroyers, these warships, the cruisers "Graudenz", "Pillau" and "Estraturg", will set sail. The Austrian cruiser "Saida", which was also ceded to the Italian Navy, sailed from the Austrian port of Pola, bound for the Italian port of Brindisi. DON MIGUEL IÑIGO. Yesterday we greeted the distinguished officer of the "Leon XIII" Don Mi<ruel Iñi g", shortly after having arrived in this port, coming from Spain, this beautiful liner which he belongs. We welcome the happy arrival of the aforementioned ship to these beaches and we reiterate our greetings to our cultured friend. Mr. Iñigo.
To the Puerto Rican legislators In the face of the resistance of our worthy Legislature in refusing to grant the vote to the Puerto Rican woman, the progress and intelligence of the great American people, different from ours in language and customs, but with a great conception of right and duty, prevailed. And the sublime ideal triumphed by the force of reason and justice. Thanks once and a thousand times to that great, thinking and just people. Now we, the progressive daughters of Puerto Rico, can say before the elections: "We are equal in duties and rights, as individual citizens. Long live the United States of America! If our Legislature^ had heeded the voice of our women, some years ago it would have approved women's suffrage ahead of the United States Congress. It would have been a great and ineffable joy for us to procla- , mar: Glori i to our legislators. Thank you, my compatriots, for your patriotic action. The women of Puerto Rico have fulfilled their aspirations and should feel satisfied by it- " Our ideal, the great ideal of suffrage, has been achieved.
The very serious problem of sugar in the great Antilles.
< From ¡a Havana) j The Government of the United States seems determined to come to the aid of the farmers and colonists, providing them with the money necessary to finance the next harvest.If the generous offer of the Ca<t Blanca were to be accepted as a quicker and more comfortable solution to the present crisis, let us think of a much reduced price for the sugar harvest. With what authority could we be able to indicate this or that type or demand certain conditions in our favor. 1 if we are debtors of gratitude and di i ñero d>. 1 American Government? It is true that CubanthaMpdadGs and colo- ■ us to ddfd^ the ma- i quinations of lo¿ (Bteúladúres van kees. clarified re$U*M^a|Aite that they did not attempt to resyefiML^^^^ ^^^^ideration that merasmel him "people and he Government of the United States. They are willing to offer the former, through the latter, sugar at a good price, provided that a contract stipulates that it will be valid for several harvests. But this, which could be successfully managed if we were duly independent, will not happen if it is the American Government that gets us out of the present predicament. Hence our vote against this solution- If all those who have authority to affirm it, are agreed that united colonists, planters, merchants and bankers, can solve the problem here in our own backyard, why should we waste the opportunity, in which the adverse circumstances serve as an incentive, if we do not have the conscious gesture to free ourselves from the foreign economic yoke? Be the "Bank of Issuance" - -com- j beaten by those who dream that ! V>do is "business" and everything can be done, be it the "Sugar Clearing House", be it through the cooperation of the Government with its unproductive funds, be it through the merger of the banks; but let it be developed in Cuba, let it all be done here, and we will definitively guarantee the future.
A NEW DILUGE WILL PUNISH MEN BERLIN, September 27.-The world will be hit by an enormous deluge, the face of the earth will be completely changed, mankind will be totally destroyed and everything will change to give way to a new order of things. So says 31 German author Karl Brand ¡erpatch. in a book entitled "The Flood. Will it come again?" He adds that the macabre spectacle will be witnessed by the generations of the year three thousand two hundred and supports his criterion with evident astrological and astro nomic evidence, in which he emphasizes that the geological conditions in the year 3,200 will be analogous to those witnessed by Noah, when he occupied the famous Ark.... Headaches come from intestinal poisons. Take LIFE PILLS FROM DR. ROSS to unload your intestines and you will feel your head clear. Notice No. SB-S. Se plisa y fotran botone*. A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt.
A frightful explosion in the city of Ndpoles.
(BY ENGLISH CABLE.) LONDON, Oct. 1.- News from Rome says that nine Peruvian women have been killed and 18 wounded in an explosion which occurred in a gunpowder factory near Naples, which Victoria completely blew up. The horrible explosion, which also destroyed some houses, is believed to have been a criminal attack committed by the anarchist elements of Italy, in combination with the metallurgical workers. On the 15th of this month will be inaugurated the commercial airline between Paris, Budapest and Constantinople, in which 15 huge air leviathuns will operate and which will be served by more than 200 crew members. The inauguration ceremony, to which great importance is attributed, will be attended by the President of the French Republic, Mr. Milierand, and the Minister of Commerce, Mr. Isaac. THE GREAT FESTIVITIES OF THE AMERICAN CONVENTION. NEW YORK, Oct. 1.-French General Fayole, his aide Captain M- de Senechal and a considerable number of members of the army and navy of the United States left this city today for Cleveland, where the convention of the American Legion will be held. General Fayole invited the Washington government to send representatives to the great Convention, which, for the same purpose, will be held in Paris on November 22, next.
The tar on the highway I Important neighbors of Caguas and Cayey inform us that they do not know what the Department of the Interior intends to do with the tar which is deposited on the side of the highway between these two towns, and which, according to reports, is destined to pave the road. For two months the barrels of tar have been there," said the two neighbors, "almost dying of laughter. Upon receiving the above complaint, we requested reports from the Department of the Interior and the Deputy Commissioner, Mr. Jesús Benitez, informed us and explained graphically what was the cause and why the tar has not been used on the roads; - We are merely setting up a bulldozer for the purpose of not wasting time pulling the stone with laborers, because it would waste a lot of time, and the Department has to be doing all its work" quickly. I am sure-with you saying Mr. Benitez-that people who know about road construction have not asked what the tar is doing on the side of the island road.
i ' =■ = i-- - - - - - = -'' - í LAIN CLOTHING ^ FOR GENTLEMEN
KIRSCHBAUM j! From $65. $75. and $80. f i WITH 30 °L DISCOUNT ? at $45.50, $52.50 and $56.00 j GONZALEZ PADIN Co.
STYPLUS ; From $40. $50. and $55. * WITH ' j.G 25'1" - DISCOUNT at $32.00, $37.50 and $41.25 J - - San Juan, P. R.
EX-REPRESENTATIVE FERNANDEZ GARCIA, EXPLAINS HIS JOINING THE SOCIALIST PARTY
While passing through Cayey we visited Mr. Fernández García, whose recent entry into the socialist ranks has been the note of the day in the island's politics, -Fernández García is a socialist- they told us.... And we immediately thought of doing an interview with him. He receives us in his professional office .... Knowing our purpose, he laughs .... -He is already ours, we thought, and asked him the first question.... -There I will bring," he answers, enthusiastic, "my enthusiasm as a fighter and my creed as a convinced person. The voice of Fernandez Garcia, full of impetuous sonorities, reminds us of his fiery speeches in the House of Delegates in that intense campaign in which the demolishing pickaxe of his verb threw the Fair Law to the ground. -We invited him, sure of hearing something interesting from his lips: -Tell us about your joining the "Socialist Party". We listen to you -I have joined the Socialist Party, because it is the only political party in the country that has no defect of origin that incapacitates it to carry out the juridical transformations demanded by the current of universal aversion to individualism, at the same time that the opinion that this must be modified by the intervention of the social element is becoming more firmly established. The productive development of the world calls for a series of new legal institutions which clearly and precisely define the position of the social forces in struggle. The ultimate aims of the socialist movement have already been formulated in a number of statements, and these could be, in the words of Professor Anton Meager of the University of Vienna, fundamental economic rights. Apart from Russia, which is undoubtedly the most interesting social laboratory in the world, the practical application of the new legal concept is already being sought everywhere, with a special tendency towards the development of the new socialist movement.
STUTZ Roadster of the latest model with very little use we offer it for sale at a very cheap price BORINQUEN TRADING CORPORATION EDIFICIO BELAVAL Tanca No. 2 - Tel. 1104 Garage Stop 17, Santurce SAN JUAN. P. R. THE DEAD WILL RISE IN THE YEAR 1925 CLEVELAND, September 26. - The American soldiers killed in France, says E. Van Ambeg, will rise again and live forever. This sensational prophecy was made at the Student Bible Convention held in New York this month. According to Van Ajnbeg, the year 1925 will be decisive in the history of mankind. It will bring about, he said, the resurrection of the dead, the restoration of Eden and the establishment of the capital of the world in Jerusalem.
DON GUSTAVO MARIN HERRERA ¡ A.yer arrived from Cuba, aboard the Manuel Calvo", together with his distinguished wife, our excellent friend c^m Gustavo Marín de Herrera, worthy Consul in the sister Antillean island. Mr. Marin spent a long time in his native country, with his family, and now returns again to this capital, where he is distinguished and appreciated by our good friend and his distinguished wife. While Mr. Marin was absent, he was replaced, with extraordinary success, by the worthy Chancellor, Don Gus-1 lavo Alvarez, who enjoys great sympathy in San Juan, for his chivalry and intelligence. the neighbors of the above-mentioned towns what is the purpose of the Department in letting the barrels of tar remain unused in the affirmation of the road.
The Department's aim is to suppress the yield without work. Already Australia and New Zealand have imposed limits on the right of property; they have established the legal day, and the minimum wage; they have instituted compulsory arbitration and free employment agencies; they have introduced pensions for widows; they have destroyed the landed estates with the (progressive) tax; they have socialized the railways; they have socialized the railways; they have socialized the landed estates and the landed estates with the (progressive) tax; they have socialized the railways; they have socialized the landed estates and the landed estates with the landed estates; They have socialized the railroads; they have prescribed rest for pregnant women; they have established cradles so that working women can breast-feed their children, preventing the rickets and impoverishment that have as their sequelae intellectual and moral misery; They have taken measures to prevent accidents at work; they have placed vacuum apparatus in the workshops to reduce the mortality rate from occupational diseases and from tuberculosis, caused by the constant irritation of the dust produced by the handling of materials; they have reformed, in a word, the civil law, which must change, which must be modified, in parallel with the transformations taking place in the economic order. This is not the sole aim of socialism. (It tends to the socialization of all the means of production; but it has (as instruments of social progress) the propaganda of ideas, the diffusion of culture, the discipline of civic duties; and the final, definitive victory is at the end of a series of par ¡ cial triumphs. । The socialist party does not expect its trinn I fo from a supreme catastrophe in which ¡everything perishes Socialism, as a political party, has as its primary mission the formation of the public consci- , blica. The parties are for the elections, for the Parliament, and only partially, temporarily, for the revolution. Socialist action seeks at all times to remove moral and material obstacles, combating old errors and preoccupations, annulling stale and stale
and preoccupations, annulling rancid sentiments, shaking the ideological scaffolding of present-day society. This action will necessarily be conditioned by the legal and affective coercions of the environment; but the socialist party in Puerto Rico, as in other regions, using the political instruments of the capitalist social organization, will work for the transformation of the State in the sense of replacing the government of the people by the administration of things. As for the immediate future of the socialist party in Puerto Rico, without falling into candid optimism, it can be affirmed that in the next elections । it will triumph in half of the municipalities of the Island, and that in those of 1924 it will completely take possession of the government of the country. The workers tried to occupy the famous castle of Villa Albani, property of Prince Toronia, but were repulsed with serious losses. The revolutionaries, however, took with them vallo ¡ sas, numerous objects of f : te and a large sum of money.
THE REVOLUTIONARIES DID, HOWEVER, TAKE AWAY THE VALUABLES, A LARGE NUMBER OF ITEMS AND A LARGE SUM OF MONEY. Emilio Cortés Rivera and Reguío EsI cobar stole from the Star Drug Co. pharmacy a box of lotion, valued at six dollars. Cortés was sentenced to serve thirty days in jail Escobar could not be included in the complaint because he was on the run, but he will be tried partially, since he has already been captured and is serving other sentences for the same crime of which he is accused.
■i i ■
<^3putbo^^ > MB. JIEALBB L Bzistend* Tamafia* %", K. metric and " BUICK I SoUríto iKoate*. # b 8C8. DB L. TIUAiaX. fe