EL MONDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, >4.00 One year, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
: "na "ISUIOUIM andar peni* (So. 801} eatkeróed by the áet of oetobar A 191?. oa file at the Poet Office of Baa Juan, Porto 1 1***0 Bt ordar of the Preaidoat, a. * Burieeon. Poatmaeter
| Entered -- .eccud elees eucter. febraery il, lili -t the Poet Of See tl Baa Jaaa, Porto Bise, ( U a i 11 < Statee of America) wader the Aet of march S. 18 TV
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 16, 1920.
NUMBER 514.
ARO II
It is believed that sugar will not go below $10 a quintal.
The news received from New York assures that the measures taken by the Cuban Government in regard to the marking of sugar is a step towards giving stability to the sugar market, which in New York is still and signs on the basis of cents for sugar from Puerto Rico. From the city of Hudson also in terms m that sales have been made of 4^00 sacks from Peru-for immediate shipment at 6.50 cost, freight and insurance. ■agon the last notices received, * one of the refineries has lowered its co tíñetenos for refined to 12 cents at which price second-hand sugars have also been sold. As far as raw sugars are concerned, the volume of operations continues to be very limited, and the demand for refined sugars, although perhaps somewhat improved, continues to be very weak. In this situation, some sugar growers are of the opinion that lower prices will be expected for the next harvest, because they say that if now, in spite of the small quantity of product available, prices are low, will this not happen in two or three years, when the production will be inert. Other sugar growers, with whom we have spoken, believe that the resolution taken by the Cuban centralists, of not selling their sugar until February or March, will determine a price more or less stable in "i product, which will not go below TEN DOLLARS per quintal These are the opinions of people knowledgeable in the matter, although the reality, as you can see, is different. Hmrts for doctor don Agustin Mojica i t - ¡ On Saturday 23 of the corrientte embarked for the United States Dr. Agustin Majiea Dueño, young medí-' co who currently resides in Juncos. He is going to enter the school of Public Health of the University of John H >pkins, in Baltimore, Maryland, to make certain special studies which will last two years, at the end of which he will receive the degree of Dr. in Public Health. We believe that he will be the first Puerto Rican to obtain this distinction. This is the first scholarship granted by the Rockefeller Foundation. The Rockefeller Foundation proposed to defray the expenses of two young Puerto Ricans who would undertake these studies, on condition that the Government of Puerto Rico would do the same for two other young people in the same circumstances. The bill to this effect was not approved at the last extraordinary session of the Department of Health Insu T ar received the cable announcing the granting of the scholarship to Dr. Muji en. thus gallantly rescinding the meritorious Corporation and the recommendation made to that effect by the Department of Insular Health. From all this we can derive nothing but benefits for Puerto Rico, and we believe that the country, understanding it thus, will have to reciprocate its applause and its gratitude to the generous institution that in such a way extends the good to us. RENUNCIES ACCEPTED The Governor has accepted the re nancies <p lúea of ^arranquitas and "urarthil" fie Rio Grande, respective mmtt, Jete N. Berrios and Juan Calzada.
The film "LOS JINETES DE LA JUSTICIA," will open I today, Saturday, 16, at the Victory' Garden Cinema. I Cine Puerto Rico, Tuesday 19; Cine Imperial, Thursday 21. "Then throughout the island. 1MEDAL FILM CO.  KORBER & Co., Inc. o ' , SAN JUAN, P. R. "
Great women's work done on the island of Cuba
The cultural and propaganda work of the Women's Club of Cuba is not confined within the limits of a campaign for the vindication of women's rights and the defense of their interests in the different spheres of activity to which it is devoted among us. Extend its action in such a way that it can be infinite with advantage for the moral consistency and thus an effective work beneficial to that society is carried out. The last session held by the refereed Club, had its most significant note in the conference of Mrs. Aida P. de Villaurrutia, who has so distinguished herself in the cultivation of letters and for her initiatives The theme developed belongs to the category of healthy preventive ideas of social order i The conference found in a happy name - THE POISONED - the clearest synthesis of all its noble purposes. In Poisoned, yes, a graphic expression that reflects well the pernicious effect of certain Romanesque readings on female youth. In order to make known, at least some of the concepts that mark the physiognomy of this conference, which was a happy success, we make the following selection, which covers the fundamentals of what the distinguished lecturer exposed: ' - How many homes have been undone by ■ indigestion of pages devoured by the fever of curiosity, curiosity that, once satisfied, produces in these women anxieties that in countless cases divert them from the course of their lives'. We refer to those novels in which the authors, with elegant figures of i words, exquisite cadence that impre ■ : siona pleasantly retentive, and with unparalleled refinement, are installing the poison in the soul of these girls " "We must keep in mind that the ; writers are the missionaries of great (des ideals or fearsome convictions, which: । elevate or bury the individual of whatever epoch, since the book, sometimes for good, and sometimes for having known how to flatter the majority, resists the action of the years." "It is enough to meditate briefly on the significance of the mother of the family, who is in charge of molding the soul, educating the feelings of the child, to realize exactly the importance that she must have for us and take care that the Antillean woman does not cease to be what she has been up to now: good, noble, saintly. Dr. Quiñones Jiménez recovered what was stolen from him The remarkable young oculist Dr. Ni colas Quiñones Jiménez was the object of a robbery a few months ago, which took place in his beautiful residence in Condado. The excellent Dr. Quiñones, although his specialty is the eyes, ears, nose and throat, failed to sharpen the senses of sight, hearing and smell in the men of the detective, which happens to Dr. Jimenez for the first time, as only triumphs has always obtained in his brilliant career, But chance, which is the enemy of the hunts, has discovered what was stolen in the house of Dr. Quiñones,! The detective Mr. Alvarado was the one who managed to recover what was stolen. We congratulate him for this; and above all, our distinguished friend Dr. Quiñones.
5,000 Reduced to $3,500
200 Casimir Suits of $75.00 with 30 c f Discount at $52.50 One 250 " " " " 50.00 " 25% " " " 37.50 One 250 " " " 40.00 " 20% " " " 32.00 One 200 " " " " 25.00 " " 30% " " " 17.50 One 150 " Alpaca " 40.00 " 30% " " " 28.00 One 200 " Silk " 40.00 " 20'" " " " 32.00 One Depto. Gentlemen's Clothing. Gonzalez Padin Co. San Juan. Fonce. y* ¿/Mayaguez.
Poles and Russians have succeeded in understanding The influence of America in the termination of the war.
(BY FRENCH CABLE RIGA, Oct. 15.-The Bo!cheviki< and the Poles have terminated the agreement under which Poland obtains concessions from Russia in regard to! minen;! of iron brought from the Ukrainian mines. This question has provoked some demonstrations in the preliminary negotiations. CUBA BANKS RECEIVE AID HAVANA, Oct. 15. -The banks of this city received today cash amounting to six million dollars. PARIS, Oct. 15.-The newspaper "Echo de Paris" announces that the conferences between France and England on the Vilna incident are continuing. Both Governments agree that the Warsaw Government bears no responsibility for this incident, and trust that a solution will soon be found by the "League of Nations". It was agreed that France and England should send a note to Warsaw reminding them of their modem position on the question of frontiers. According to the "Petit Pa risien", this note has already been sent to the French Government. THE HUNGERED MAYOR STILL GETTING WORSE AND WORSE t LONDON, Oct. 15.-Mac. Swiney, the Mayor of Cork, who has been suffering the consequences of the strike, spent last night in an extremely weakened condition.
| PARIS, Oct. 15.-French engineer 2 "Ir. Loth, has communicated to the Academy of Sciences his latest invention, consisting of an electrically illuminated cable to enable ships to enter ports during any heavy snowfall. The Minister of the Navy, who attended the first rehearsals, has given orders to install the aforementioned cable at the entrance of all ships.According to the "Leititin", one of these cables is to be laid across the Channel, to facilitate maritime communication between France and England during the winter. WE OFFER Wheat Flour Patent first BRAND "JUSTICE" just received. Make no mistake USE "JUSTICE" FLOUR WITH PREFERENCE. Ask us - prices. ANDRES JUSTICE i Alien 88. San Juan. । - THIRTY HEEIDOS IN A TRAIN WRECK . PARIS, Oct. 14. -Trains from this , town and that of Argentenil collided at the entrance dtí bridge of Asnieres, producing a frightful catastrophe, . At first it was thought to be an anarchist attack, but the alarm ceased after a few minutes. Thirty passengers were injured, most of them seriously. GREAT LOSSES IN FRANCE i i i PARIS, Oct. 14.-Water storms ' have produced enormous havoc in the French Republic. The Garonne and Tarn rivers have burst their banks, producing high floods, which have swept away many leagues of plantations.
THE POLES OCCUPY VILNA. WARSAW, October 15 : - The new occupation of Vilna by the Poles has caused great enthusiasm in all the countries of Europe. M- Bourgeois has telegraphed to the Military League of the League of Nations in Poland, informing it that ( the Polish government disapproves of the ac' tivity of General Bolig*>vski and de- ■ cia <. that the latter will have no choice but to repair the unpleasant in1 cident. ! - _ ! THE INFLUENCE OF AMERICA j IN ENDING THE WAR PARIS, October 15-At a luncheon attended by the United States Ambassador, he spoke i about the influence of the New World in ending. the war in favor of justice and right. The Ambassador added that this is an eloquent indication that the two hemispheres must remain closely united in order to rid the world of imperial despotism and a barbaric and savage proletariat. Nilo Pecnnna, former president ¡ of Brazil, presented on behalf of the ¡ diplomats of America the most sincere wishes for the prosperity of Europe and especially of France. i The representative of Brazil recommended a more united friendship between Europe and America in order to annihilate imperialism and to bring triumph and victory to the principles of liberty and justice. M. Pecr.nna gave a salute to heroic France and made special mention of M. Millerand, incarnation of the French genius and who will lead France along the paths of order and freedom.
JOSE FIGUEROA'S FAREWELLING CONCERT For the last time will play in San Juan, the precocious boy José Figueroa, who says goodbye to his native country in search of musical culture centers more favorable and more conducive to his artistic development. Puerto Rico no longer offers this intelligent child sufficient scope for the expansion of his multiple artistic faculties and his great musical slowness. Hungry to reach the summit of expression in the divine music of the great Maestros, thus earning the blessing of Santa Cecilia, your child Figueroa goes in search of wider horizons and easier means to succeed in his high and beautiful purposes. The genius needs to fly and to fly he needs a field. He is a child, favored by the Muse of musical art, which has crowned him with flowers and laurels. José Figueroa in not too distant days will honor his homeland abroad and he will honor it in a singular way. The one who writes these lines is the teacher of the boy Fi gueroa and from the beginning he attentively observed the student's progress and in spite of the difficulties of all kinds that he found at the beginning, the progress was constant and remarkable to the highest degree. (Continued on page 3.)
Coffee ^Yaucono" _ Hotels, cafes, stores, casinos, cabbage shops and all establishments, acquire customers with coffee "YAUCONO. "Insist on getting the legitimate one, in packages sealed with the word "YAUCONO" and refuse those with similar title, offered to you. Packages from a quarter of a pound and hygienic tins and cartons, which preserve aroma and flavor for a long time; suitable for sending to your absent family and friends. If your grocer doesn't have it, contact us. Jiméaez & Fernándec, sole owners of the FAMOUS "YAUCONO" COFFEE brand. SANtUECE: TeL 406 RIO PIEDRAS: Calle "J. de Diego" TeL 182, Apartad" 965 SAN JUAN, P. E.
The beautiful village of Miramar will be one of the best places of amusement and entertainment in the country, according to the plans of Mr. R. J. Meeham, who has already stated that the plans of the new company are nearing completion and that the splendid building formerly occupied by the "Miramar Cinema" will also be refurbished. The new company intends to completely renovate the "Enreka" hotel and prepare new and comfortable apartments that will have nothing to envy to the best hotels and summer resorts in Madrid and New York. A magnificent orchestra will be brought from this city to liven up all the amusements, as well as a troupe of entertainers who will delight the guests in the cafe and Cabaret. Mr. Meeham is president of the (Continued on page 3) Headaches come from intestinal poisons. You can use DR. ROSS LIFE PILLARS to unload your intestines and you will feel your head clear. Arpheus N. >4.
About 1,200 I special policemen will be used.
Yesterday began to give l^s ins ( tructions necessary for the day of ' elections to the entire corps of the , San Juan police. Sergeant Cabán instructs the ¡ guards in the minutest details J which they are to observe and the orders I which they are to enforce on the second of November. The policemen receive instructions 1 on how they are to maintain the ranks in ! each of their respective polling stations. The policemen are instructed how to keep the lines in each of their respective polling stations, so that the voters keep the proper composure and do not disturb the order as much as possible. Captain Schettini also instructs his subordinates on a daily basis. The special police will be recruited shortly. The assistant Mr. Ju I says, told us yesterday that although the board of elections has not yet been informed of the number of polling stations, it is estimated that about twelve hundred men will be employed as special policemen; that is, one man for each polling station established on the island.  The President also orders that the flag of the United States be flown at full mast on all public buildings of the Government, as well as on the posts of the United States Navy. All religious services held on that day in the United States and in Puerto Rico will be dedicated to the American soldiers killed in the war. MOVING MORE FAMILIES TO THE BARRIADA OBRERA The Department of the Interior has again sent government trucks to the neighborhoods of Miranda and Hoyo Frio, in Puerta de Tierra, with the purpose of continuing to move families closer to the dredging for the new houses that are being built in a hurry. From Monday to Tuesday of next week, the auction for the construction of 100 more concrete houses will be announced. In the important magazine "Ameri-i can", which arrived yesterday in Puerto Rico, there is a sensational interview with Edison, the science n?a-' go, about a marvelous apparatus he has just invented. With it, according to Edison, it will be possible to establish communication with the spirits medically, without the need for the intervention of "mediums." Edison assures that he will soon make his prodigious apparatus known to the public. -♦♦♦♦♦♦♦o""""""""""""""""* ICINE LUNA | . TODAY - SATURDAY- TODAY .. i The always a-Jmir da x CONSTANCE TALMADGE | in the precious 5-act drama ¿ THE LESSON and the third episode of $ ALIVE OR DEAD | TOMORROW SUNDAY i IN THE MATINAL AND EVENING i RED SKIN VENGER | and a Selection v comic.
The American Tob. will not resume work until the 25th.
| To the Workers of the Tobacco Industry । We hereby make known to all the workers of the Porto . Rican Ameris in Tobacco Company I that the said Company, upon the arrival of its President, Mr. Toro, informs that it is materially impossible for the Company to resume the work on the date agreed upon, i.e., the 18th day of the current co ' rent, because the number of cigars returned was much greater than expected, and that these returns were for vitolas of all kinds. 1 That in view of the situation and of the reasons stated above, it has decided that work will resume on Monday, October 25, in all the shops, and that it will have the opportunity to give its workers the opportunity to pro ' bar out of doubt 1: urgent and unavoidable necessity of having to make this determination. And in such virtue we communicate it to i all the workers purely so that es- [ tén perfectly informed and not í incur in expenses of transfer and I other expenses counting on resuming ■ the tAlhajo on the date that previously- । mind had been conveni<lo. i San Juan. P. R* October 15, 1920. P Rivera ' MARTINEZ, President. Hundreds of tourists ' are coming to Puerto Rico According to statements made to us yesterday by a senior employee d" the "New York and Porto Rico SS. Co." the first tourists who wish to spend the cold season here are already arriving in Puerto Rico. The influx of tourists will begin at the beginning of December and we know that we will be visited by high and well-known personalities of the forum, banking and American society, many of whom have already requested lodging in some hotels in the city. The cabins of the steamers which have made the voyage between this port and New York are full of passengers, and it is impossible to find room for them now, as they are engaged and intended for tourists. I FOR AIBONITO The illustrious President of the Supreme Council, Don Jose C. Hernandez, has gone to Aibonito, with the object of spending the days of this month resting in that picturesque countryside. He is accompanied by his distinguished wife and children. I descants them a very pleasant esI 'uncía in the poetic village. i INSPECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASUREMENTS ! Don Juan Cancel has been appointed inspector of weights and measures of Maricao. He plisa and forran botone*. A CARAZO, Brau St 72. Advt. - I Portland Cement "Alsen" I LLEGO ANOTHER CHARGE < ¡ BY STEAMER " EDITH." ¡ " PRICES WITHOUT COMPETITION. < í STUBBE BROS., Inc. ¡ ' ~ SAN JUAN, P. B. * ' ' DR. MOLINA DE £T. BEMY 1 Oculist-Special surgery of I03 eyes, > ears, nose and throat. ' 54 Alien.-Entrance by Tanca. J 1 Consultations from 10 to 12 and 2 to 5.^í > Telephones 207-623 black -interinam "to ' San Juan, P. R. Adid.
Royal Gregg School On Monday, October 18, in the morning, new shorthand and typing classes will commence at the very creditable. The school is directed by Professor Maria T. Camacho de Robles Alien 80, San Juan, P. R.