THE A® ND O
- 8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4*00 A year, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
aho n
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
" euMnbta "nd dimHwd uadir |i..it {No 801) tm.ruM i "á. 1 i** A 1 tu 1 Port Otico "f 8m Jare. P "X I Blow Bv nol* of 1 Widia. JqM
i n" ¡ana -- cma abetar t "br,,r< 11 lata ! - Oto Qteya Qa" ?aaa. m Bn, ¿Uatlaá *"""■""Jar la Zea ut wriX S 18TS.
NUMBER 4S".
Important details of the flooding in Cabo Rojo.
Wednesday was a day of unhappy memory for the Caborrojeños. It had been a long time since we had witnessed such a tremendous flood as yesterday. Older people told us that, indeed, they had never ▼lato a flood as impetuous as this one. EOS PRIMEROS x AGUACEROS For ten days heavy downpours have been falling on the population, with different ▼aloe inter ▼aloe. But yesterday is accentuated ton more and more, lloviedo tor renci alian te since twelve o'clock in the day. It was raining for some hours. FORCEFUL ELECTRICAL DISCHARGES The downpours were accompanied by strong electrical discharges, which con tributed to increase the dread and fear among the inhabitants. Crops suffered greatly, with numerous oxen and cows being killed. FLOODS The creeks and streams invaded the population, causing serious damage. The creek called "Tuna" was the one that endangered the lives of women, the elderly and children. The first to render aid was the police officer, Mr. Casanova, who, several times, exposed his life, being dragged several times by the current. Mr. Casanova was helped by several people, among whom special mention should be made of Diego Xana" who also put his life at risk; the policeman Martin Rodriguez, the young Amérieo Rivera Silva, and Dr. Ibern Fletas and others. LAR-4JA4AH8 LOOKED LIKE RIVERS ** The flooded streets looked like huge rivers. The street from Prim to Salvador Brau was impossible to cross, for ■ the current swept anyone away. ! Carbonell Street was in the same condition, as were other streets. THE LOSSES Fortunately, there was no loss of life. The greatest losses were to property, as the floods destroyed crops and sowings. Farmers with whom we have spoken tell us that they have lost more than 25 percent. In several ' stores in the town, the damage was , also numerous. The bakery of Don Antonie Montalvo was the one that suffered, as it lost a lot of flour and a large amount of supplies. The stores of Miguel Carlo, Petrovich Hermanos and several other stores also suffered great losses. THE LIGHT The appearance of the town last night was gloomy. The electric motors did not work as they are completely flooded. The water is still falling and another flood is feared. CORRESPONDENT
The Light Company gave a bond of $10,000.
From the island we have received several letters concerning a resolution of the Public Service Commission, agreed to on August 3 of this year, prohibiting the P. R. Light and Power Co. from continuing to charge the minimum charge for its light and lighting service, as it had been doing before. According to the Commission's disposition, the Company could not continue charging the minimum charge of 60 cents in San Juan and 80 cents in the other towns of the island where it provides light or electric power. The company, which has a franchise that authorizes it to do so, according to the Law, filed an Injunction, through its attorneys, before the Court, which was interim granted, thus rendering the resolution of the Public Service Commission null and void, on August 3 of last year. Don Manuel V. Domenech, director of the Light Company, will be interviewed today by an editor of ■ EL MUNDO on this important question, and will give his authoritative opinion to our readers on Monday. -
Brilliant session of the Academy of Medicine According to this announcement, the eighth and last session of the present academic year was held.- Continuing eiv the discussion of the tem^asobre differential diagnosis of the pyrexias of Puerto Rico, Dr. Torregrosa read his eighth clinical communication and by laboratory means of filarial fevers. and making ¡then a summary of all the pyrexias comprised in the group of intermittent. Drs. Font y Gusllot, Gutiérrez' Igaravídez and Coronas took part in the debate, at the end of which the present academic year was declared closed. The Academy now enters its vacation period and the next academic year will be inaugurated in the first week of the coming November, with Dr. Villaronga having been entrusted with the corresponding speech. The United States Department of Justice has begun an investigation to find out the motives of the owners of restaurants and restaurants to sell a tomato, originally worth a penny, at prices ranging from 60 to 70 cents once placed on the table along with a leaf of lettuce and some potatoes.
G O L E T A "REPUBLICA" " - - - - - ' AL So will dispatch on the 15th of the present for Santo Domingo and San Pedro de Macoris. Admits cargo for said ports. For information: ANTILLES TRADING COMPANY. Office: Marina 14, in front of pier number 2. Receives cargo at all hours of the day.
REMINDER j that we have WHITE ZINC | ENGLISH "TWO LIONS" in stock. n Korber & Co,, ¡no. . ..... 5 - 5 II
All communications with Rome are interrupted
Earthquakes shattered poles and wires !
(By French cable) . I ; Paris, August 10.-The Cabañeros of Columbus have arrived here ! from Pau. - By the steamer La Lorraine has left for New Y'trk the first ship to repay the loan of $250,000,000 contracted by France in 1915, of which $150,000,000 has already been paid. Paris. --Marshal Foch and Generals Degout and Leconte have arrived in Koblenz and reviewed the French troops stationed at Bona. Numerous airplanes gave greater animation to the parade, which was successful. The French families acclaimed the leaders and burst into cheers for Millerand and Foch. ,
- Smyrna. -The Greek troops ocu- ¡ parried the Simavtiz?nt-Oueimk line inflicting heavy losses on the euemig>. Rome. -Due to the great earthquake, telegraphic communications have been interrupted. The church of St. Paul is in ruins and the towns of Fomi. Montignóso. The navy arsenal is also destroyed. The tremors also destroyed ¡a. p <b ation of t olo smandna. 1 l r > <atlr 9 _ -The Caba- * Ueros of Columbus have arrived, who were loudly cheered by the crowd. They saw the cast.Iio de Chantilly and attended a reception held in c! Town Hall, after which i * -
which they visited the church and the Archbishopric. All the buildings were in gala nated with flags. Zurich. -A radiogram from Moscow announces the death of General Se nienoff. - Paris. -The French Government has accepted the nomination of Lord Hard j. ding as English Ambassador to Frar, cia. I_the visit of Miilerand ai army Je x*upation continues to take place ■ eon splendid weather. The members of the Cabinet, accompanied by Marshal Foch and General Degoutte!!! left Koblenz this morning." The Cabinet members, accompanied by Marshal Foch and General Degoutte, left Koblenz this morning to visit the settlements along the Rhine.
-- An American cruiser ran aground on the Baltic coast.
Earthquakes continue to cause numerous deaths and ruins.
- Washington, September 10.-The cruiser Pittsburg, flagship of the American Admiral Mr. Huse, ran aground in the Baltic Sea, on its way to Dantzig. The warship is three miles off Libau, on the coast of Curland. Official reports say that she is in no danger. Ftnmc. -Gabriel D'Annurjzio pro- ! clamed this afternoon to Fiume as independent Esta- i do.Shortly after the official ' act, he sent a note to the Poten- ¡ cies, giving him an account of it. Athens. -Venizefis, with his arm in a sling, pronounced in the Chamber - - It seems that the Ponce pact has been broken]| i (By telegraph) - I Ponce, September 19. I THE WORLD, San Juan. It is assured in a persistent manner since this morning that the pact between socialists and republicans has been broken in this city, due to the efforts of the commission presided over by Julio Aybar, who has had a very interesting conference with the Free Federation and socialists. This news is producing deep discouragement among Republican directors and much congratulation among the majority of non-partisan workers. The Correspondent. as hot Due to an error in the layout of this newspaper, in yesterday's edition has appeared, in addition to that corresponding to that day. the section "As day as today" corresponding to today, 11 of the current day. Buttons are pledged and lined. A CARAZO, Bran St. 72.
; ra an enérigic speech about the í treaty between Itaiia ^Turkey, as well as* about the Dodeca- ¡ nesian islands. IRonta. -Another mo'euiisimo earthquake occurred in the Emilio district, c>n very considerable loss of t lives and horrendous damage to property. i Fair.-Olive Thomas, cii nematographic star, was poisoned yesterday with : mercury. Her death was horrible. Madrid. -Marcelino Domingo, head ' of the Republican party in Cata'uña. . adhered to the unionists. DON MANUEL Ali DEA NAZARIO 1 Among the various candidates who aspire to a seat on the Workers' Compensation Commission is our friend and comrade Don Mai nue! Aldea Nazario, currently editor of La Correspondencia. We believe that Mr. Aldea Nazario, for his profound knowledge of workers' affairs, for his uncommon gifts of intelligence and for his intense newspaper campaigns throughout the country, deserves the tentative post he aspires to. Aldea Nazario entered the public life of Puerto Rico at a very young age, and always devoted himself to the defense of the homeland. He wrote and collaborated in the newspapers El Territorio, Dio rio de Puerta Rico, Lia Demoerueia. He laido Español and others, being his articles reproduced by the pren sa da Cuba and by the Puerto Rico Herald. that ent .rices directed in New York the great patriot Muñoz Rivera. He has always been in the ranks of the Unionist party, having rendered innumerable services to that party, and in 1900 he was Muñoz Rivera's trial companion. Later he was private secretary of the mol vidahle Don Ramón Marin, whom he always accompanied. In 1912, Aldea Nazario was in Washington defending the tariff designated by Governor Colton, by virtue of a joint resolution of the Legislature. He served as chairman of the Red Cross Publicity Committee and joined the third officers' camp. We have no hesitation in recommending Mr. Aldea Nazario for the position of member of the Workmen's Compensation Commission, confident that he will do an excellent job there, as he has plenty of character and ability. Aldea Nazario is a " magnificent cu didato that deserves the support of the asamb'en mionistar <né will be verified today.
= I - ! RUhao. -They are preparing brilliantly for the launching of the beautiful merchant ship AUowj "o XIH. : which will take place on 1-1. -1 " 1 Brrrrrrrlomt. -Unionists seriously wounded the Mayor, Mr. Osorio, as he was leaving the " í visit to the prisons. -Workers at 'a Canadian Electric Plant threatened, ron ia strike " i , . - . ga. The authorities were very concerned about the strike. Sa" Sebastian. -Mu ey Hafie, ex- jj - sultan of Morocco, has become known as a " * - f champion of shooting. Today " i began to compete in the cup of the Spanish "radons." The dissidence at Cape Rouge is worsening in the islands! * w (By telegraph) Cabo Rojo, September 10. 1920. I EL MUNDO. San Juan. Beg us to publish the following te = legramaz "Antonio R. Barceió. Sarta Juan. We expect until today to cite the Local Committee Commission and the undersigned i to try before you to try to resolve disi- ¡ 1 dencia vijente here_ Your attitude reflects the no importance given by you to local Unionist cohesion. Faction "Union Cabcrrojeña" which you are sitting 1 mos. will act next elections in accordance with your principles. Commitment contracted by you unfulfilled, you rtiévanos in all further responsibility re- ' nunciated committed entrusting us 1 A. J. Fleytas COLBERG. Rodolfo COL BERG. M. del Toro COLBERG. EXCHANGE MARKET: DOLLARS. (New Tarty iñeta P PESETAS. ( FRANCES "O" oD , ' POUNDS. 3.65 i MARK. 2 "icts. LIRAS. acts. --- THE ANTONIO LOPEZ J > ' Left yesterday; for Spain carrying ' 200 passengers.
i MR. DEALER I Existence Tamafios %", b %", metric and / b EUICK P Ask pricee I \ b EOR DE L VILLAMIL a j CIA.
Prw "t "m6 ywiys J
SATURDAY 1 1 Í)E SEPTBRE. DE 1420. |
The new president of the Mexican Republic.
The cable correspondent of EL MUNDO couranicates the news that General Alvar® Obregón has triumphed in the elections for the presidency of the Republic of Mexico. The name of General Obregón, is going around the world from mouth to mouth and from magazine to magazine, surrounded by a military halo that many army chiefs would like for themselves. In this general, everything is military; his appearance, his voice, his intelligence, his romanticism, and to tell the truth, I cannot conceive that anyone can climb the higher ranks in life without being attracted by a superior idea, a fantastic idea, but that when he tries his body leads to reality instead of being ruined in the chimera. Tall, stocky, handsome, in an impeccable white uniform, he brings to my mind Michelet's warm praise of Klebcr: "He has such a military nature that we feel like warriors at his side: -I aspire to return to the hacienda, to nú humble quinta ''Chilla'' to en treganue de nueve a las luchas del agn cultor; converted ios rifles ap*T , os de labranza; las balitas en s®nillas. estos najes llenos de galones en espantapájaros. In General Obregón we can't guess his true character at first glance. (Continued on page 3) Tonight debuts the ::: i Velasco Company For this evening the appearance of the great Compañía de Ve- i , lasco is announced. Two ex- ii ii ii "¡ent revues will be unveiled, whose representation- - ' ción obtained great success in Cara- t " cas and in Havana; Domingo de PiMta. ktra by Mario Vitoria and music by maestro Lechona, and Mujeres^ : i g Flores, also much applauded abroad. j It is announced for tomorrow nn great maíiníe dieño and p. "r the evening the se-j ¡i ganda function of alomo. The gala evenings are back at the Municipal, which will be invaded by the best and most select of our society. WILL THE ANGLO-JAPANESE ALLIANCE BE BROKEN? - The United States and Great Britain are examining closely the serious question of the East, which has made much more delicate the extra ordinary activity which Japan has displayed both in China and in India. Great Britain does not appear to be willing to renew the alliance with Japan without first subjecting it to certain conditions. Japan has warned that if the alliance is renewed it must be in accordance with the basis maintained by the League of Nations. To keep the stomach, liver and intestines healthy, use Dr. Roas' Life Pies. FOR SALE ¿ L A "Hudson Super-Six" automobile in segnificant condition fnform 1 in the Administration of this newspaper. ADVT. i' i NEEDED i - J A salesman for merchandise and knitted goods who has expat juncia in i Pwerte Rico. Must give good referen << das and be single. >i Address to P. O. Box 51& Advt j
Behn Bros. financial power in gtan Antilia.
SCHOOL NOTEBOOKS. A LARGE ASSORTMENT RECEIVED _ STANDARD HUNTING WORKS TAKE ADVANTAGE NOW. LlitlTED PRICES. TmtWfn ñemeo ral- Ae pagw Am*s al Ma IdNe 9. 49 almndtMui Ho. S49.
Mr. Her nard Bebo, vare president of 3a ''Port of Ha baria Dock s Company '' and presi dent of the ''Cuban TeJeph?n- C®, has returned to Havana. According to our reports, Mr. Behn's trip is due to the conflicts in the Havana ports in connection with the boycott which the federated workers and the merchants of Havana have declared. Mr. Behn spent some time in Mexico, where he managed a U.S. and Cuban company. A rumor circulated that Mr. Sorthe tics Behn, a Hernani bermaro. had requested Sa interverc mn from the Washington gobicra® for the decongestion of the Havana port The '' Trade Association ' ' ' has picked up the Timor that the ' ' ' Tort of Havana Dock Co. '' in combination with the other companies constituting the Havana Dock Trade and Industry Association had asked the U.S. government for protection against an alleged conspiracy by the Havana trade against non-U.S. commerce. The Liante-Ruban coimes claim! The Liante-Ruban coimes assert that this is only a conspiracy between the importing trade, which has been mistreated and humiliated, and a selfish and unscrupulous company. j Front® will cross the seas aEtiMam"? three new ships.? ships which have exp-e-viously been built at ^tiUeros bríéá. nicos by the new rapo res venture "Traveling Artillery**. i These ships have already been named "Cayo Cristo "*. Cayo Romano ■' and "Cayo Mambí". the other ships have analogous names ■ The new Cuban Company intends to acquire up to two ships. with them it will complete, for the time being, the fleet, by adding some steamers to the cargo and passenger service between Cuba. Santo Domingo and Puerto Rico. i The vessels of the "Viajera AntáDa na ' are perfectly equipped for the use of oil. They have the capacity to carry in their holds ■ linó tons of cargo. The new ships will be inaugurated at the end of October, and will have the highest rating of "The British Corporation Regictev of Shipping", which has been built. The landowners and settlers of Cote indicate the convenience of delaying the next harvest, as the only way of not damaging the sugar prices, due to the influence that the depression of the market has on them. The sugar cane field work is very much delayed because of the restriction of credits and the increase in the cost of labor. Two hundred and fifty thousand cane canes for the next harvest have been sold at a price of over eleven cents, including cost and freight. THE COHKKPO58A1 UNIVERSITY OF P VERTO RICO College of^Agriculture and Arts MosáEiraa, Mayaguez. F E - The registration for the regular course of the College of Agriculture and Arts of the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez. will be held on September 10 and H, and classes will begin on the 13th in all departments. Preparatory and university courses are offered in agriculture, sugar cane, civil engineering, mechanical and electrical engineering and general science, leading to a bachelor's degree in any of these subjects. Those wishing to report with respect to the rotee es corsos pneden soBcttartos del Recto" Ta tartne refer WaHoee O. Fortran". Mt *-*-"*- Aflv*.
PrmtinG