elmíndo
8 pages 3 ctvs. semester, S4*0S A affe. S7.M
OflebMBl ■shrader Brau. FT ToL <33 P. a Box 341
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR H
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO [
' rubUBMM and distributed under permit (No. 801) aushoriMé *v M* i Act at October 0, 1017, on filo at the Post Offleo of Son Juan. Potto I Rico. By order of the Preeidaat, A- a Burleson, Pootataotor Oniorti
k. a tarad - a a aacond elMa maítar. f o b reo t y i 1 . ISIS, at tha P o a t OfSea at S a ■ Jaan. Porta Bieo. ( U ■ i t a 4 o* tmayoa* "indar tba Art at 1 1870.
SATURDAY, JULY 31, 1920.
NUMBER 440.
The Germans offer a formidable army The "Bolshevikis"® seize Lithuania.
U THE BIGGESaREGATES IN NEW { YORK ■' n - ' J ■ - ■ V wf";* -- *' *■ - s - ' ' ' ' - t ' 7 A -- ■ - - V' T* - "* - "* - > ' ' ' = h- ■ " , .... ■ ■ " ~ "i. ■it""' 'v 'ík X. \ ■■ " " - - *v.. i < W■ ite * i ■ v- i ■ m w s ci ■fl/ ' ; c c c bit: r 'Cl C c:¡ ■If H"' hww" C" c.tB." / Éj -j Cr 4 KF % , z ' b~r'- ' The yachts "Shamrock IV" (left, crossing ja liuea firal. The yachts "Shamrock IV" (on the left, crossing the firal liuea. with ven'aja on its competitor) and "Resolute", on the right, in one of the most exciting moments of the fight tn which. in the end, was defeated - Fo *- ü . &
A man tried to commit suicide late yesterday afternoon in San Juan I.
Yesterday, at six o'clock in the evening, tried to commit suicide, inflicting a knife wound in the throat, the individual Ramon Santiago, resident in San Sebastian Street No. 10. THE EVENT. At the cries of the relatives, the policeman on duty nearby, Pedro Pagan, arrived and made the corresponding investigation of the event, managing to learn that Santiago had made an attempt on his life. Sitting on a chair, against the wall, was the almost lifeless suicide. His clothes were full of blood. From the wound the red liquid gushed out in great quantity. Pagan immediately called for the ambulance, in which Santiago was taken to the emergency room. WHILE HE WAS BEING TREATED. Practitioner Rodriguez took charge of the wounded man and gave him the first treatment. While he was treating him. Rodriguez asked him: -Why do you want to kill him, man? -For nothing. I'll keep quiet about that. -What kind of knife did you use? Tina "Gem" blade. It turned out to be nothing, otherwise I'd take my life. If only I'd had a better one! -Like this one," said the practitioner, showing him a large razor. -Like this... Like this one. You give it to me, because I'm still afraid of killing myself. I'm abhorred"-almost gri|ó Sad'ia go, stretching out his arm to take the an". I HAD TRIED TO DO THE SAME THING. ... . According to what the suicide's family told one of our reporters last night, Santiago had attempted suicide several times. One night, Santiago's wife woke up startled, screaming uncontrollably, because her husband had put a rope around his neck and was trying to tie the opposite end of a ceiling beam. Fortunately, relatives arrived in time to save him. For many days Santiago had a purple circle around his neck. The other day, Santiago also wanted to commit suicide. He insulted his relatives with words, until he made them leave the house. Once alone, he prepared to kill himself. Someone who was watching him through a doorway called policeman Pagan, who caught Santiago tying a rope to a nail sticking out of the ceiling. -What are you going to do? -Ta ve. Putting this rope to hang my son's crib. Indeed, Santiago hung the cradle when he saw that he had not been able to hang it himself. \ According to our reports, Santiago was abusing alcohol. Precisely yesterday, when he attempted against his life, he was in a state of drunkenness. And this, together with some unpleasantness he has had with his rib, is, we were told, the cause of having taken such a serious resolution. TO THE HOSPITAL Once healed, Santiago was sent to the hospital in quite serious condition. The wound measured 8 centimeters, completely tearing open his throat. Some believe that Santiago's mental faculties are disturbed. The condition of the wounded man, at the time of writing these notes, is serious.
Steamer "CONDE WIFREDO" Owing to the strike at the port of Havana this -Steamer will not arrive at San Juan h^til August 16 next. Sobrinos de Izquierdo & General Co. San Juan, Puerto Rico.
New York paid tribute to the memory of Betances I
I " In a letter which we have received by the last mail from our distinguished friend Clarence Fergueson, we have been informed of the details, which we publish below, of the Eohmnes tributes paid by the city of New York to the remains of the distinguished patriot Ramón Eme terio Betances, which rested for many years in the cemetery of Father La Chaise, in Paris. The remains of the revered West Indian patriot were placed in a chapel of rest in the Municipality of New York on July 19, and there they remained for more than two hours. The urn was placed on the table used as a desk by George Washington from April 1789 to August 1790, at the time when New York was the nation's capital. For the first time in the history of the city, the City Council Chambers and the historic table were used for an act of this nature. The retinue in charge of transferring the remains of Betances to the Municipality of New York left at noon from the house of Dr. Henna. Upon arriving at the Casa del Pueblo, a Guar dia de Honor, formed by eight members of the city police force, dressed in full dress, served as escort to the retinue. The Guard of Honor lined up on either side of 1£. the entrance gate at which was placed a large portrait of George Washington. During the time that the remains of the distinguished West Indian rested in the Municipality of New York, countless people paraded before the urn that holds the venerated ashes of the beloved patriot, paying a high tribute to the illustrious man who in the annals of patriotic history occupied a place analogous to that occupied by Abraham Lincoln in the history of the United States. The ceremony was solemn and unusual. The Commander, La Guardia, President of the Council, made a beautiful oration on behalf of Mayor Hylan, who was absent from the city and was succeeded in the use of the word by the Resident Commissioner, Mr. Córdova Dávila. Colonel Hines, Commissioner of Public Works; Judge Spiegelburg and other distinguished persons of the great city, joined in the tributes that the city of New York, on behalf of the American people, has paid to the memory of the great Puerto Rican. When the remains were taken from the Municipality to the Bufará transport, there were more than 3,000 people surrounding the retinue that was to accompany the ashes to the ship. A police escort on motorcycles accompanied the procession. Press photographers took Variks pictures of the ashes and were impressed with films that will be shown throughout the United States. The city's press joined in the grand tribute, sending repte stations to the following newspapers: New York World, Evening Sun, New. York Telegran, New York Ame rican, The Globe, New York PostNew York Tribune, New York Mail, New York Journal, New York Times, New York Herald and La Prensa. ■ > Se plisa y forran botone*. A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt.
Enthusiasm builds to receive the 'Alfonso XIII.'
We are told that the Festivities Committee has agreed, in principle, to present each member of the battleship's crew with a box of cigars and 25 packs of cigarettes. We are thinking of other presents to be given to the crew and officers of the battleship -Alfonso XIII". REDUCTION IN RAILWAY FARES In order to give an opportunity to the many thousands of people on the island who wish to attend the festivals to be held here, the Spanish seamen's hay. ^1 Director -le the Railway Company has agreed to grant a reduction of one . r -0 per cent in the prices® of the passes > S4C HAVE ALREADY BEEN COLLECTED The Committee in charge of preparing the festivities- continued its work in the trade yesterday, and succeeded in raising the sum of S40,0O0. It is expected that today will be covered the sum of S50,000, which is intended for the expenses arising from the festivities. IN LA FORTALEZA Ei Vice consul of Spain visited ayei afternoon to the governor. Mr. Benedicto Ei distinguished governor reiterated to the representative of Spain his strongest wishes that the festivities in ho- . ñor <- the sailors turn out to wet it, with í ' WeXos* festejos, based on the brief permanence of the battleship here. IN BARRANQUITAS We are informed that Don Enrique Gou zález Beltrán will give a gift to the officer: of the battleship with an aim-aerzo at > his quinta in Barranquitas. THE PARTY ABOARD THE ARMS ! On the last voyage made by the steamship BRAZOS belonging to : a .V,;/- York and Porto Rico S^eao,' 'hip Co., at the initiative of the very right gentleman Don Enrique Aboy. i a beautiful party was held with the philanthropic purpose of raising ! funds in favor of the "Za- ; pato Escolar" society. The party was attended by prominent men of this city and of the island, and the results were magnificent, as the collection amounted to $130.94, which will be given by the steamship company to the aforementioned society ■ I ' TO THE OWNERS OF CARS i We have received a lot of ( : accessory?: i Rubber mats and eoco J for running boards." Sillas píegadi|s8s Spark plug-t >"SpH dorf" exhaust valve for Buick, j ( Assortments of hub wrenches. Motometers for Buick and ,i Hudson. Mirrors for chau-' ffeus and interior. Cris-; 1 such headlights of various makes. Bumpers, tools, Deleo parts, etc. etc. etc. Swtiago A. PANZARDI INC. San Juan, P. R." .1
The "Constructora del Hogar" carries out ¿ its objective
í' Frácric3mente hcy áií, a lc> seven months of existence, more than j - it? i of the authorized capital of LA CON5TRUM TORA DEL HOGAR. The Association has been registered or ac do. with more than fourteen hundred and eleven shareholders. The third quarter of the authorized capital of this Association will be open for subscription on the first day of August. As soon as it became public knowledge, at the beginning of ".^rrieni? qnj| lc< Dire.tors of THE CONSTRUCT OR^I OF THE HOME estihv: pret md? - tvfl cio reai. practical, a lr. : scci? i -.";.i?ni^ tas. by li grant of cieLto"^ to can^'mir cisas be plensmcn^B demonstrated that the initiad cíes ¿e. movimien'o was:-, cim-piieañ? > p- abra, and that at last. aqr.i e:. F-erio R:_? ex" aunt a rccpcra'if organization, of practical ut" lity, of :e c niiad>. v:s.tav "N certain and effective mind that syr.a.tri * its members to coastnnr their prcpuis houses, and make them independent d? aqtel^ps realizing enormous ganasc-i- a.quíUM of those they already own. . At the last monthly ctdinama session of the Board of Directors ¡the sigvimtai shareholders obtained pristan. ■ pátan build 'us house*- J Carlos A. Varon of the departmental of the Interior: M-U- Cafmqna. ti the í Rifo El^qnte''': *Eupoj* 'OirrMla, MI zalez, of Smtnrce Rafael Erllber Goa zalez. idem: F Negron Rodriguez, of San Juan: Juan M Herrero of the Executive Secretary. The amounts provided sinmii a '.ctal of $17,500. Operating this organization on such a severe economy as the tace, reducing its expenses cemente, to the minimum. and the dues of the stockholders remaining THEIR OWNERSHIP, is how it is expressed" from the eccnomical point of view. The Sobrinos de Izquierdo, owners of the magnificent steamer "Conde Wifredo", received yesterday a letter from Havana, in which it is announced that the steamer will leave that port for San Juan on the 12th of next month. 1 The steamer "Count Wifredo '. in ei which will make trip great number of people. will arrive therefore to this p ierio dM i 15 to the 16 of August VELADA IN THE ATENEO IN HO NOR A BETANCES On the occasion of the arrival to San Jna* : of the res' os of the doctor Betances, faiteado in Paris, a literary evening m prepares eh the Ateneo, in U that will take i part distinguished escritcres of ia city. Among these is the distinguished historian of Puerto Rico, Dr. C. CoU y Tosté, who will dissert, with the vaste erudition he possesses, on the life and works of the illustrious hero who was so interested in life in the fate of the land that served as your cradle.
I + I jH ■ gg Yesterday at ua P- has passed away repeotíoameate cat Río Piedras. I Don Ramon Caloca Cueto ■ ■ ■ D.E.P. ■ His hrruoar Dea Jaaa, |)0Ba Vitaba and Daña Aatoaia, sas cu- ' i M fiadas and relatives. Dea Lais Chovas Zeqacira, Dea Aateaio Go- - ¡ M dínez and Dea Ramea Meatier r, in sharing with their aaiiges so fu- . n this news, invite to the eatien" qae teadrá lagar bey at M 4 P. M- Cemetery of this peWncióa. i ■ Río Piedras M of Ja!" of 192S. i (No esqnelaa are distributed.)
The revohition > ¿receives in ^í tiorte de^éjjgp.
Six American destroyers receive urgent orders to sail for Turkey - Murders continue in Barcelona.
MADRID, July 30-In twelve days, ! which is today, thirty-five unsyndi < calized workers have been murdered in the capital of Catalonia, where terror prevails again. SIX PETARDS BURST IN SAN SEBASTIAN MADRID, July 30.-Six dynamite cartridges, placed by criminals, have been blown up in different places in the town. It is believed that this event is related to the strike of the tramway employees. -The rest of the representatives of the Powers, who will attend the opening of the Council of the League of Nations, which will meet today in the city of the Cantabric Sea, presided over by Don Alfonso XIII, have arrived. LUDENDORFF HAS OFFERED A FORMIDABLE ARMY. >Ludendorff, ex-generalissimo of Germany, has offered to raise an army of a million and a half men to attack and crush the Bolsheviks, provided that the Allied nations agree to suppress certain articles of the Peace Treaty which are vexatious to Germany. CONSIDERABLE REDUCTION OF SERVICE IN SPAIN MADRID, July 30.-The Viscount of Eza, Minister of War in the Spanish Government, affirms that he will reduce military service in Morocco to two years. -The head of the Government, Mr. Dato, conferred with the King regarding the bakers' strike, which is becoming more and more serious. -The wine growers of Valdespeñas have thrown away all the excess wine, in order to make it more expensive. BOLSHEVIKIS OVERTHROW THE UTUANJA GOVERNMENT? WARSAW, July 30- -France, । lia and England succeeded, at last, in p- ¡ nding to agree to solve the Russian pro । blem, which presents itself every day 1 more bristling with difficulties. i The Bolsheviks have overthrown the । government of Lithuania and have elected Soviet sympathizers to replace the authorities who have been removed. i THE REVOLUTION CONTINUES ; EXTENDING THROUGH MEJICO ¡ MEJICO CITY, July 30.
! the Baia California, continues to receive men in haste, to confront the Government troops ■ i who, in great numbers, are going to attack- | 1c. ¡ LAST HOUR. HAVANA, July 30.-The alleged perpetrator of the placing of a dynamite bomb in the church of San Felipe, during the celebration of the feast of Santa Mar- i ta, has been arrested. English and American warships ¡ DON RAMON CALDCA ■ i At his residence in Rio Piedras f>-j arrived yesterday suddenly our distinguished friend Don Ramon Caloca. Mr. Caloca, head of an honorable family of that population and a person who enjoyed general sympathy in Rio Piedras, for his probity, his honesty and his exemplary character. Mr. Caloca was a member of the Unionist Party, to which he gave all his enthusiasm and devoted all his activities. His love for the country led him to join the Union of Puerto Rico, (and he was always a selfless and consistent defender of the ideals of that party, without change or surrender; ;- J>of his merits speaks loudly his lim' X" hi<da; of his personal qualities, all those who, if only once, had the opportunity to work with him, are tongued, from whichever side you look at him, from whichever point of view you consider his personality, Don Ramon Caloca was more than deserving of general praise and the respect of all. The funeral of his body will take place at the cemetery of the town of Rio Pie- ¡ i The burial of his body will take place at the cemetery of that town. The ¡ fiuniUa of the unforgettable friend and the Unionist Coad- ¡ tea invites the public for the ac te, which will be effdcto bey at five o'clock in the afternoon We send to the family of the deceased, and especially to his Mjos" to his brothers don Juan, Vitalia and den Antonio Gedínea, 1" bzyrtzMn trfnrsra of our most uznido pézamBi
। assorted in ios ports of ia co^ta. hi saw salvos of honor. ROME-Between Greece and Italy there exists a serious controversy, on account of the Doec-anese islands. which are cis , putan the two nations. WASHINGTON -Six destroyers - ¡ have received urgent orders to sa- : i lir at full speed for the ports ' । of Turouia¡THE "BOLSHEVIKIS" SHAKE HANDS . HAND IN HAND WITH THE TURKS. ( PARIS, July 30.-The situation in ■ Eastern Europe is becoming more and more serious, as the "Bolshevik" forces ; continue to crush, as if they were 1 a formidable roller, Armenia, i where they are advancing vertiginously. [In government circles in London there is, on this occasion, a great deal of agitation, because it is feared that the Bolsheviks will join the Turks, since the vanguards of the Nationalist forces of the Sublime Porte, led by Mustafa Kemal Baya, and those of the Bolshevik troops, have been in contact with each other. ' FIVE MILLION DOLLARS FOR ¡ THE QUEEN OF SPAIN ' MADRID, July 30.-The newspapers । of this capital insert the news i that yesterday were delivered in London, i to the ambassador of Spain in England. The Spanish ambassador to England, Mr. Merry del Val, received five millions of hard currency bequeathed by the ex-empress Eugenia to the Spanish sovereign. THE FLAG OF IRELAND ■ TREMOLA TO ALL WINDS Amsterdam, July 30. -Gmieral ■ French has decided that the most energetic offensive should be employed against the "sinn , feiners" of Ireland, who, with extra- ordinary contempt for the authorities, ' wave 1* flag of the "Republic of ' Ireland" before the English army itself, which considerably increases the rebellion ' General French has called for enormous forces to continue the struggle, for the patriots have decided to blockade, so that they may perish of hunger, all those des- ! The British army's troops that are fighting in the interior of the island. THE RESIGNATION OF MR. DESCHANEL AMSTERDD. AMSTERDAM, July 30.-The newspaper "Teiegraaf" announces that the reports received by it from Paris, concerning the health of Jfc. Deechanel, allow to assure that the president* of the Fthanean JtefSbiic JtefSbiic will pretend to resign his office at once,