elMBndo
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year, $.7.50
F | * * Salvador Brau, 41 Tal. 833 P. 0. Box 345 r * "x. .1"
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS-
"PuEIilhed and distributed under permit (No. 801> enthorbod o, me "no roet uñiee ef Sen Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. S. Bur teeon, Roetmaster 'Generate Rnterdd aa eecond elees Better, febraarr 21. 1919. at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Bi ■<> TTnltad Stetm nf America Aider the Aet of march "■ 187" _
SATURDAY, JULY 30, 1921.
j NUMBER 75
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO V 1 11 " 1 1 1 '"
Mr, Reily with, senior officials.
18 * I 'í 'í H R The new goljernador of the island, Hon. E. Montgomery Reily, who has produced the most intense and pleasant of impressions since he set foot on land, in company with the Acting Governor, Cqjnisionapo resident in' \A¿pshington, Party Chiefs and high functionaries, who went to receive him. "
Yesterday the new Governor arrived in San Juan.
Yesterday morning, at six o'clock, the new governor of the island, Mr. E. Montgomery Reily, arrived on our beaches in the steamer "Ponce", accompanied by his esteemed family, Mr. Córdova Dávila, his private secretary and the new Chief of Information of the Island Police. THE RECEPTION: . The reception that was given to him, in spite of the early hour of his arrival, was truly affectionate and brilliant. The Acting Governor, Mr. Benedicto, the Colonel of the Police, all the Department Heads, his military aide, Captain López Antongiorgi, and countless commissions and representatives of all the political parties, institutions and government and social organizations of the island went to the dock to receive him. RECEPTION IN THE FORTALEZA: After the crossed greetings in the "bellows" between the Governor and the personalities who went to receive him, the retinue went to the Fortress, where the presentations were made.
THE GOVERNOR'S FAMILY: Mr. Reily's most esteemed and distinguished family consists of his wife, Mrs. E. Mont. Beily, his daughters Gillie Anne and Hoitence (the latter vie ce somewhat delicate in health) and two nephews of his wife, John B. and Anne Hull. THE PRIVATE SECRETARY: Mr. John R. Hull, Mr. Reily's private secretary, is a native of the State of New Mexico, of which he has been a prominent member. Mr. Hull speaks Spanish, and when we asked him where he had learned it, he stated that in the Legislature of that State discussions are conducted in both languages, although English is preferred for procedural matters. '! The new secretary has come in com I psñía of his young and beautiful sister, Miss í Anne Hull, and they are related to the ! wife of the Governor, Mrs. E. M. Beily. i ft, CHIEF OF INFORMATION: i 1 Appointed by Mr. Reily, to fill the position of Chief of Information of the Police (i.e., the post now held by Mr. Dobby), he has been appointed by Mr. Reily to the position of Chief of Information of the Police.
Mr. George McKlure, who has been for many years a member of the Secret Police in the United States, has arrived in his company. "EL MUNDO" PRESENTS ITS RESPECT: Our Editor, Mr. Pietrl, shook hands with the new governor and offered his respects on behalf of EL MUNDO, which wishes Mr. Beily a frank and positive success in his efforts to make his administration the most beneficial not only for the progress and economic and political development of the Island, but for the benefit of the good and friendly relations between the Island and the continent. PUBR TO RICO ILLUSTRADO" GRAPHIC INFORMATION: The Graphic Editor of the popular and nice magazine "Puerto Rico Ilustra" (Oeuttafia "a la pagina S.)
NOTICE I Because of the inquiries we are daily being asked by some tobacco workers now working in our factories, we hereby place on public record that all tobacco workers who have entered after the suspension, in accordance with the notice published on April 7 in the local newspapers, and in conformity with the letter of our President. of April 11, can count on a permanent job. We will fulfill everything we have offered and absolutely no one will be able to induce us to change the adopted policy. The abnormal situation through which our industry is passing only permits us to employ the number of workers which justifies the orders of cigars in hand, and at present only a small number of tables and vacancies remain, which we hope to fill within a short time with the large number of applicants who have presented themselves in the last few days. > The new operators who have recently joined the factories will be respected by the Company in their rights, as well as the old ones, and will remain in their positions. PORTO RICAN AMERICAN TOBACO CO. of P. R. . San Juan, P. R., July 20, 1921.
YEAR III
ST. (HOMAS PROTESTS BEFORE CONGRESS.
r- The Colonial Council of St. Thomas has submitted the following protest, which it has just received, to the Congress of the Great Republic. "The Colonial Council of" fit. The Colonial Council of St. Thomas and St. John, (Virgin Islands) of the United States, has been greatly surprised by information received from the Government, to the effect that the Congress of the United States has imposed upon the above-mentioned possessions the Federal Income Tax Law and other measures, without first giving the Colonial Council an opportunity of hearing it. * f . The Colonial Council has every reason to believe that the provisions of the second section of the JoloRlal Act, in view of the American ideals and principles represented by it, are respected by the Congress, and does not fully understand the reason for the legislative action in matters which are directly concerned with the interests of the community of the Virgin Islands. The Virgin Islands Colqnidl Council believes that its s< and dignity have been undermined by the attitude of Congress; and for this reason, and the attitude assumed not being necessary, it solemnly protests with all the force of its spirit against the adopted program, which is nothing but an attack on the principles of the Colonial Council. The Colonial Council was inaugurated on November 27, in the year of grace 1863, and the previous action of the Congress of the United States is unprecedented in the annals of the Council. The Colonial Council was legally constituted and appointed from the people of the Municipality, and believes with right that no action should be taken by the United States Congress without first having heard the Colonial Council, and in accordance with nffpteréMMpeatar-'y three of the Colonial Act; side the Governor to send to Congress and the President of the United States this protest, as speedily as possible. We are pleased to inform our readers of the arrival on this island of the distinguished gentleman and eminent journalist "fon Vicente Balbás Capó, who enjoys good friendships in this country. Mr. Balbás arrived on the steamship "Tonce" and will remain in Puerto Rico for some weeks, as he has fixed his residence in New York. The ün affectionate greetings to the dijtinguido companion. FRANCE APPOINTS EXPERTS FOR HIGH Siesia j PARIS, July 27.-According to ' "Le Journal," the French government has appointed Massigli Laroche < Froj mageot, experts on High Siesia.
Wifl < 1111 11 HUW-MKffiWSBH" wCool Clothes for Hot Days Keep Kool High quality and low prices Keep Kool Palm Beach Look stylish and spend little, see Casimir Batista $8.50, 10.00,12, 15. our large Summer assortment $24.50 27.50 and 30. White Yarn Denim Gonzalez Padin Casimir Pore Weate $27 50 Co., Inc. $15 00. Dril de Hilo Crudo San Juan Alpaca Inglesa $2000 Ponce Mayagüez $20.00 | Kool Krash $7J5O
"Victory Garden" Today Noisy Success Today Cecil B. de Mille Special with 1 Gloria Swanson ; in the 7-act drama Why Change Wives? Don't miss-you'll like it
SUICIDE IN PONCE (By telegraph) Ponce, July 29. EL MUNDO, In the afternoon today beach town in a bathhouse ranchóse young Luis A. Nazario, 20 years old, a native of Yauco, occupation tabaqueroFececiendo immediately, municipal judge Córdova and police Playa investigate case. It is believed that the situation is bad for the police to take such a resolution. Our friend Guillermo V- Cintron charged with contempt of the Federal Court. The CORRESPONDENT. I
Theater "America" Today and tomorrow Cinema and Variety 30 cents DEBUT-DEBUT MR. MAURA Y ESPOSA Ilusionista.-' Transformista- Esperimentos Científicos Premiere in Puerto Rico LA VANGUARDIA DE LAF0NT drama in 7 acts Tomorrow Sunday LA HONRA / Premiere in Puerto Rico and new 1, works by j "MAURA Y ESPOSA".
ElGobernadory su^apropriated famifia* . w i w
The very worthy governor of the island, JMr. E. Montgomery Reily, in his Intimacy, after having received the greetings of welcome and the tributes, of affection qu$ were paid to him, for all that he is most worth and represents in Puerto Rico; The honorable Governor appears, in the photograph, accompanied by his wife and daughters, who have also caused a very pleasant and favorable impression among Tas personnel who came to greet the Fortaleza.
The Morosretrocé3onan!ul Spanish thrust
(BY FRENCH CABLE) MADRID, July 29.- The Spaniards operating in North Africa have repulsed the attack of the Moors in the region of Melilla. The whole western zone is calm because the Spaniards have managed to dislodge the riffians from their lairs, from which they were harassing the population. The "Compañía Trasatlántica Espa ñola" has placed at the disposal of the authorities all its ships to transport the troops to Morocco. Colonel Lopez, aide-de-camp to Colonel Fernandez Silvestre, has arrived in Madrid and has conferred at length with the King, to whom he related, with all its details, the development of the horrible tragedy which culminated in the most dreadful death toll ever recorded in Morocco.
PARIS, July 29.- The newspaper "New York Herald", edition of this capital, publishes in French an article in which it commemorates the centenary of the freedom of Peru, in which it sees a universal homage. It declares that a country so rich and of so ancient a culture will render to the cause of civilization eminent services, and vows for the full restoration of the lands of Peru to its natural frontiers where the sons of the said Republic shed their blood fighting to maintain South American solidarity. The great magazines "Le Correspondan!" and "Hebdomadaire" publish very flattering studies on Peru. THE FIRST STONE OF THE LOVAINA LIBRARY IS LAID LOVAINA (Belgium), July 29.- The ceremony of laying the first stone for the erection of the building to be destined to the library of this town was celebrated, to which ceremony was attended by an immense crowd, in which stood out the Kings, the Ministers, the Diplomatic Corps and the Foreign Representations, which infused the act with much brilliance. Cardinal Mercier, Dr. Butler and the former President of France, Mr. Trincare, made speeches in which they reminded the crowd of the destruction of the library by the Teutonic artillery and thanked the promoters, especially the Americans, for having attended to the reconstruction of that monument of letters. M. Poincaré, in particular, was extremely applauded for the sensational speech he delivered. The former President made a history of German aggression; he anathematized the crimes committed by delirious armies led by chiefs drunk with imperialism who strove to destroy partiC1NE LUNA Today the magnificent drama in 5 acts entitled 'THE DIVINE SACRIFICE' by Kitty Gordon and a comic. Current prices. ~ " ---------- Se plisa and forran botcnei. A CARAZO, Brau St 72. i( r ( AdTt .
cularly the works created To the honor of science and the arts, and expressed the hope that peace would not permit the repetition of such horrors. - PARIS, July 29.- The Minister of Peru, accompanied by members of the Delegation, the Consulate and the Colony, laid a magnificent bronze palm, with the colors of the Peruvian flag, on the tomb of the unknown soldier. He was received at the Arc de Triomphe by Commander M. Marty, who represented M. Barthou, President of the capital. The Peruvian Minister, Mr. Cornejo, declared that, in homage to such a great and unknown hero of the war, Peru was hastening to honor the greatest army in history, because it has always been the army of freedom. Commander Marty replied to Mr. Cornejo that the Minister of War and all of France had found him to be the greatest army in history, because it has always been the army of freedom. War and all of France found him deeply moved by the 1* ná - ble attitude of the Peruvians residing in Paris, and recalled that there are many people who have sacrificed themselves for the sake of Liberty and Justice. g J FRANCE FEARS A KILLING OF THE - ALFIR g PARIS, July 29.- The French government has addressed to its ambassador at Leñares, Auxair< a*nAa for ' g to insist again to the gov- no of Great Britain on the imperative necessity for France to have the security of her tro- i pas in the High Slesa asserted. Presentation of the dramatic prodiíeption in 8 acts GO AND GET IT by the famous actor and director 1 MARSHALL NEILLAN . 1 J 'Extraordinary Prices ' *>1 Tomorrow, Sunday Great Society Dramatic Production in 8 Acts t j "THE AJENA CLOTHING" ' ' J By Glady Walton V *5 s Current Prices '¡