ELM1NDO
8 pages 3 dtvs. Semester, $4.00 One year, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
I' - Published and distributed under permit (No~801) authorisedby the Aet of October 6, 1917, on flit at the Poet Office ot San Juan, Porto Rico. By order Of the Preeident, A. 8. Bur ieeon. Postmaster General. Entered ae second class matter, I february 21, 1919. at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rico, United States of America under the Act of march 8, 1879.
SATURDAY, JULY 16, 1921.
NUMBER Z43.
Centralization of the tobacco industry has ceased.
An editor of ours, who had a long interview with one of the directors of the "Porto Pican American Tobacco Co.*'', was extensively informed of the progress of the above-mentioned company's operations and of the "full lot" which has been put into effect to put an end to the strike propaganda which has been going on in the principal centers of the industry. San Juan and Bayamon, we were informed, will no longer be centers of tobacco manufacture, and in almost every part of the island nearly all of the small factories have been opened, all of which are working under admirable conditions, and yielding an enormous output which has reached 1,500,000 cigars per week, and is increasing all the time. By the end of last year the company manufactured more than 5,000,000 cigars per week, and although the demand is not now equal to what it was then, the company believes, nevertheless, that it is in a position to serve much more cigars than it does at present. The main office and most important factory of all those now owned by the company, is that which it has recently established in Are jefbo. The removal of the factories at Puerta de Tierra and Bayamon has left hundreds of families without employment, and the Puerta de Tierra factory building is being replaced by the taba eos making machinery which was established at the Marina. In the building of the Marina will remain the factory of cigyrülos, with the transfer of the other machinery, more comforts and more peace. Although there are no buyers in the tobacco market, many buyers have remained waiting for a good or better opportunity. The price of the best quality tobacco leaf is currently stipulated at 18 to 2C renteros, against 60 or 65 cents pssedn, which has caused tobacco producers to take action to procure a better price for their product. One of the things they were doing, we were told, was to do the de-stemming themselves and seek buyers in New York directly, thus gaining the benefit of an intermediate agent. Although the product this year has turned out to be of higher quality than in previous years, the fact that they have it in storage without finding buyers represents a considerable loss for the farmers, as well as for the small producers who are unable to find money because of the financial crisis currently affecting the island. RIO PIEDRAS APPLAUDS LICDO. MESTRE, (By telegraph) - The WORLD. Article on the death penalty by the exalted "Attorney General" of Puerto Rico Salvador Mestre causes great enthusiasm in the society of Rio Piedras. I, for the good of liberty, and a constant admirer of the most meritorious men of our land, send a heartfelt embrace to the distinguished magistrates who, like At torney, always bring applause to Puerto Rico. Isidoro Colón COLON A - Palace Hotel Báfle Lunch in the Roof-Garden Every Saturday Cheap Lumber I have just received by the schooner "ROSEMARY" a cargo of lumber of all sizes which I will sell at prices never seen after the war. Do not buy lumber without first meeting me at Pier No. 6. F. Benitez REXACH. Ddvt Se plisa y forran botones. A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt.
The anniversary of the death of the distinguished patriot Sr.de Diego.
Today marks the third anniversary of the death of the eloquent orator, poet, jurist and legislator, whose departure from earthly life was an irreparable and painful loss for Puerto Bico. In all the moments of his life Diego was in love with the land where he was born, dedicating to the propagation of the nationalist ideals all his physical energies and all the activities of his immense and privileged talent until the very moment of his death Of the contemporary politicians, he and Muñoz Rivera were the ones who enjoyed the greatest popularity among the masses of the people. Both, although for an idealism, the independence of Puerto Rico, and with the word and with the pen they traced to the multitudes the directions to follow to obtain from the metropolitan government the solution of all our problems. José de Diego fné the divine sower who in the furrows of the collective conscience sowed the seed of the great and beautiful ideal: ''government of Puerto Rico, by the people of Puerto Rico f for Puerto Rico". And to pay the highest homage to his memory, the people of San Juan, in whose bosom he lived the most fertile and agitated years of his existence in a relentless struggle, will cover his tomb with flowers, poets will sing beautiful songs, and the bells of glory will let their Argentine voices be heard, as a fervent prayer that condenses the immense and eternal gratitude of the homeland. The sugar market is still sluggish It is enough to listen to the news about the sugar market that we receive daily from the North to realize that the market is still in the same conditions of inactivity, although in these days they have made operations with 114 and 3¡£ higher. In spite of everything, there is great optimism among many sugar growers, who believe they will soon see the major difficulties resolved, and hope for a favorable reaction in the life of the industry. A sugar producer friend of ours, who has no reason to misrepresent the truth, told us yesterday that he trusts in the reaction we spoke of before, which has already begun to be noticed in the last operations carried out in the United States. In the North, according to some sugar bulletins, there are large quantities of the product in the hands of private individuals, who bought it when sugar reached the exorbitant prices of the war. The times," added our friend, "are difficult; but we must trust that a favorable change will come for the sugar interests, and for the principal of all businesses. DON JOAQUN TRIGO * Our excellent friend, the learned gentleman Don Jos quín Trigo, representative on the island of numerous houses in the United States and Europe, is in San Juan, coming from Aibonito, where he is spending a very pleasant summer season, to give rest and solace to the spirit. - The arrival of Mr. Trigo to Sar Juan has been a real surprise for his numerous friends, who love him for what he is worth. Mr. Trigo will spend a week in San Juan. We are pleased to send 61 most affectionate greetings of welcome to so noble and kind friend. 1 The cute comedy in 6 acts La Hormiga Brava ' LA HORMIGA RAVA. by the great comedienne DOROTHY GISH - Current prices. Tomorrow, Sunday The popular and friendly CARMEN MYERS ■ Amor Nublado "
Carpentier reel bill more ovations than Jack H, Dempsey.
At lis two fifty-eight, Carpentier entered the "ring," and received a standing ovation from the audience. The ovations for the French champion went on for several minutes and hundreds of hats were thrown in the air. Francis Deschamps, Carpentier's manager, entered the ring soon after, and occupied the southeast corner. Jack Dempsey appeared later and received less ovations than the Latin rooster, being surrounded by the photographers of the film companies and members of the "New Jersey Box in Company". During all the minutes that preceded the fight the champion was surrounded by photographers. "One of the most interesting details of the fight was that Deschamps stood a short distance away from Dempsey, to observe the way in which he put on his hand bandages. The president of the Jersey City Boxing Club presented the boxers with the gloves, which were tied with blue ribbons. At 3:15 the fighters were in the ring ready to begin the fight. Humphries announced first Dempsey and then Carpentier, but all present say that Carpentier received more ovations than on this occasion. In the first round, Carpentier attacked, but did not get off lightly. He was knocked twice to the ground, in the course of the contest, until he was "Knockout" in the fourth round. NO DISORDERS It is noteworthy, and curious, that while the fight was taking place there were no disorders. Carpentier entered through the Police entrance and seemed to be nervous, but always smiling, even after the fight was over. ON THE OUTSIDE OF THE ARENA From 7 o'clock in the morning, all the places around the arena began to fill up, and by 11:30 a.m. all the tickets were sold. - Hundreds of vendors, with voices not unlike Ciruso's, were shouting around the arena. The 92,000 spectators were not arguing about the "League of Nations" or universal disarmament, but the theme of the day was the form of the "League of Nations". The topic of the day was the formidable Dempsey and the mysterious Carpentier. There was no talk of anything but muscle, quickness, agility, intelligence, punching, and so on. The entry time started at noon. It seemed like a human avalanche that advanced without fear. Spectators say that there has never been an occasion when there was a greater number of people waiting for a fight, even in the times when gladiatorial fights were held in the Colosseum of the Eternal City. The acclamation this time was very loud, for they believed that the hero of the Marne was worthy of everything. The ovations Carpentier received were the greatest ever received by any fighter. All those who wish to know graphically the details of the fight, see the edition published on Friday by the popular magazine "Puerto Rico Ilustra do", which devotes almost all its graphic pages to the details of the fight since they entered the "ring", Carpentier's falls, until the "knockout" of the Latin rooster. "EL FIGARO" E1 next Monday will close this barbershop at 12 M. poi being "Muñoz Rivera Day." | . Pedro Trujillo GüU.
Attacks on P. R. launched by teachers who worked here CRISTOBAL, June 22.- Four members of the Department of Insular Education, of Puerto Rico, left here in the "C antigüe" transport for New York, on their trip of va cations, which will last until the reaper ture of the schools, in September. The members mentioned are the following teachers: Cyrus Dement, principal of the public school, in Caguas; Gordon Meader, principal of the Guayama schools; and the assistant superintendent of the Baya món schools, and lastly, the principal of the Arecibo public schools. THE SEASON IN PUERTO RICO When asked about present conditions in Puerto Rico, all the teachers stated that with sugar and tobacco at such low prices, the island's trade at present is very bad, and that furthermore, these dismal conditions were not being improved by the legislators, and that because of this, the North Americans were awaiting the arrival of the new governor. North were awaiting the arrival of the new governor, Mr. Riley, and that according to them they believed this governor to be a strong man (A STRONG MAN). The professors add that the Unionist party dominated the cabinet, the Senate and the House of Representatives...and Mr. O'Toole added that the said party was one of the three most important parties on the island, but that their rallying cry was to secede completely from the United States. "The "Unionist" party wants separation. Another party, the "Republican", demands statehood and fights for the North American union, while the socialist party has nothing socialist about it. The capital, San Juan and the main cities of the island, want nothing but independence, and Mr. Meader told us that the country does not want independence. On the illiteracy of the island, which according to them amounts to 65 or 70 percent of its inhabitants, particularly due to the lack of more schools, the "notable" professor says that the politicians have limited the appropriations for the education of the island resulting, for this reason, in an intellectual famine. "The private schools are in the hands of the Catholic Church, which has been betting on the "America" Theater Today and Tomorrow Success "PILAR CONDE" Spanish singer-songwriter. New repertoire every night TOMAS RUILOPEZ great piano performances LUIS SOLA king of the Aragonese jota and the film Kider & Company by Bryant Was burn 35 cents Luneta. Tomorrow premiere in Puerto Rice El caso de la Pollita and "Ruth de las Montañas" by Ruth Roland and great surprises by Pilar Coned, Luis Sola, Tomás Ruilopez. All new decorations and a great program. We invite all San Juan to visit on Sunday. Great choreo numbers.
Very Important 4h-
We have just received infi* nity of styles of footwear, latest fashion, for Ladies/ Gentlemen, which we offer at prices never seen before. ROQUE GONZALEZ & 00. SUCESORES Calle de San José No. 7 P. R.
Glorious anniversary to be celebrated tomorrow by the country at large
Tomorrow Puerto Rico will celebrate the glorious commemoration of the birth of the distinguished fighter and patriot Luis Muñoz Rivera, whom all Puerto Ricans loved in his lifetime and whose memory deepens each time in the hearts of those who saw in him the highest aspirations of the country. It is not necessary for us to remember who he was and how the distinguished politician lived, since the facts of his life are engraved in the conscience of the Puerto Rican people, whose cause he defended on all occasions with that firmness and energy that constituted the predominant traits of his character, to his tenacity and perseverance, to the inextinguishable faith with which he sustained his ideals. Puerto Rico owes the recognition of the political personality of its inhabitants, who for twenty years lived without citizenship or flag. He was the most ardent defender of the Jones Act in the United States Congress, and although that law never condensed all the aspirations of the country, we must recognize that it has marked a stage in his political life on which our future depends. He devoted his life to defend our right to freedom, and today we consecrate to his memory the homage of a remembrance, giving him eternal life and opening the doors of glory. As our readers will remember, some time ago, an interesting public hearing was held in Ciudad del Sur, in which the opinion of the most distinguished people of those towns was heard, about the benefits that the dredging of the port of Ponce would represent for the southern coast. Captain Stierle of the United States Bureau of Engineers, who was the one who held the aforementioned public hearing, rendered a report on the plans and the budget, which was approved by the aforementioned Bureau and by the businessmen of the aforementioned region. However, it has been ordered the execution of a more complete and detailed study of the works for the dredging of said port, which once completed will be submitted to the consideration of the American Congress so that it may assign the necessary funds for the realization of such important and necessary work. The person in charge of making the referred study is Colonel W. W. Cony, chief of the engineering office established in San Juan, on the occasion of the dredging that is being carried out in our port. Captain Sticile has made a complete study of the works to be carried out in the port of Ponce, and it has taken him a lot of time and work to make the businessmen of that region abandon the idea that the dredging of said port would be excessively costly and that it would be necessary to manufacture breakwaters and do other works of secondary importance at an exorbitant cost, and to make them understand that with the new plans that have been drawn up, the work will only cost approximately two million dollars. According to the plans that have been drawn up, the dredging will be done from Cardona Island and will include the entire eastern part of the port. The area of the part to be dredged is estimated at 243 acres, at a depth of thirty feet, and the channel will be six thousand feet in length. The cost of the dredging is estimated at one million four hundred thousand dollars and the Insular Government and the municipality of Ponce will undertake to fabricate the bulkhead, which will cost four hundred thousand dollars, in exchange for which it will obtain as a benefit the mangroves that will be cut down, that is, an area of two hundred acres of land, for the establishment of warehouses, factories, tanks, etc. For when the dredging is finished, it is thought by some to the establishment of a plant to manufacture fertilizers. In a dance that was celebrated in Manatí, Ramón Meléndez, Manuel García, Manuel Hernández and Juan Alvarez sustained a tremendous quarrel, of which the first one resulted with a wound in the back and the others ' with several contusions, They were denounced ¡ ¡Cine Luna ' It will present to f'a genial Asturiana J PILAR CONDE and troupe the pró- , ximo Monday, 18 of the Corriente. See programs: a single batch.
CarpenUiei proved to be a better boxer than Dempsey.
Our distinguished friend Don Andrés Gasparlni, resident in the North and who witnessed the "Dempsey-Car-Pentier" fight, in a letter he wrote us, gives us some details of the challenge. -You," he says, "will not be able to get an idea of how great that spectacle was, because of the enormous turnout that attended it. My entrance ticket," he adds, "cost me fifteen dollars. Then I got a forty-dollar ticket, much nearer the ring; but in spite of this, I still needed to wear my cuff links to distinguish the wrestlers. The sympathies of the people," says our friend, "were with the French champion, all those who played against him (and I was one of them) wishing to lose their money and see him emerge triumphant. Carpentier gave the great surprise to the public. Everyone expected, when comparing the two rivals, that he would not resist even the first round. But it was not so. In the first round, he proved to be a better boxer than the other. In the second bout, Dempsey was completely defeated and could hardly stand on his own feet, because of the terrible 'cyclone' of blows that Carpentier threw in his face, to the point that Dempsey's friends thought he had lost. Unfortunately - the letter continues - in one of the blows that the Frenchman threw, he lost his right hand, Ja which he could not use almost, afterwards, being then when Dempsey managed to defeat him, after another two rounds. Our friend says, although the American press says otherwise, that Dempsey did nothing worth mentioning until the third round, that is, after Carpentier suffered the blow to his hand. Moreover, the American champion himself, has said that in the second round he became nerdy. Dempsey was thunderingly roasted when he jumped out of the ring. But the applause was extraordinarily loud when Francois Deschamps, the Frenchman's manager, carried him out of the ring in his arms. Carpentier came out smiling, as he had entered moments before. The general opinion of the public was that Carpentier is a much more skillful boxer than the other, and that if in the future they were to fight again, the victory would be the former's, LA OLA DE SANGRE EN LA ISLA (By telegraph) Cales, July 15 EL MUNDO, San Juan. Crispin Meléndes, of Vega Baja, hnel guista, has just fired five shots at Felito Vega, tobacconist of the "Branch" this population. Fact has produced a great alarm. People indignant attitude striker Meléndez. Chief Lopez made arrest, order restored. Our dear friend Mr. J. de la Torre Muñiz, a well-known Puerto Rican writer, has been appointed head of the Settlement Department of the Workers' Compensation Commission. Mr. de la Torre Muñiz has been appointed to this position on his own merits and for his uncommon talent, as well as for his knowledge of the subject. We congratulate him.
rN 1 - I I I - "HATS FOR LADIES" New models just received, a great variety in styles and colors, hats of "O $5, $6 and 7.50 all to Come at once. GONZALEZ PADIN CO., INC. San Juan, P. R.
OF THE 70 CENTRALES IN PUERTO RICO, ONLY 8 OR 10 WILL RESIST THE CRISIS Talking yesterday with a well-known financier, he informed us that, due to the critical situation the sugar industry is going through and in view of the uncertain future, it is believed that of the 70 sugar mills in Puerto Rico, only 8 or 10 will resist the crisis, and those will be the ones that do not owe anything.
SALE OF ESTABLISHMENT I hereby inform the public that, as of July 15, 1921, I have taken charge of the hardware store located on Dr. Veve Street in Bayamón, by purchase of the same from its former owner, Mr. Prudencia Efre. Bayamón, July 16. ' Pablo O. COLON.
The Hellenic advance continues irresistible so far.
-PARIS, July 15.-A dispatch from Athens says that the Greeks have gained a resounding victory over the Turks, in. the last two days. According to that message, the Greek troops aan advanced seventy kilometers, occupying Barmandjint north of Ouchant. The enemy retreated north of Eski. ITALY REJECTS ENGLISH AID IN THE EAST ROME, July 15.-All the newspapers of this city reject the possibility of associating themselves in a policy with England in regard to the question of the East. This is how some politicians of influence in the Kingdom also express themselves. MENOCAL IN FAANCIA VICHY, July 15.-The former President of Cuba, General Menocal, has arrived here, where he intends to remain several days, THE FAYOLLE MISSION RETURNS TO PARIS PARIS, July 15.-The mission led by General Fayolle fné greeted at the St. Lazarus station by the represen tantee of the government and the delegates of the .Institute Marshal Fayolle declared to the representatives of the press that the reception accorded him in Canada, was excellent, the same in the United States, where his stay was extremely cordial. MR. HERRICK TAKES PART IN THE JULY 14 FESTIVAL PARIS, July 15. - The American Ambassador, Mr. Herrick, delivered a most eloquent speech on receiving a Government Commission, which went to greet him on behalf of the Government. The American diplomat went shortly afterwards to the Town Hall, where he took part in the festivities being held there in honor of the historic date of July 14 JULITA DELGADO'S COMPANY THE LAST TWO FUNCTIONS Julita Delgado's Company, which has obtained so many and such great successes during the brilliant season, which is about to end, will not give tonight's performance because they have courteously ceded the theater for the celebration of the commemorative evening of the infamous event of the death of the illustrious paladin José de Diego, For the matinee is announced the delicate comedy of Mfifrtíuez Sierra, entitled "El Sueño de una noche de Agosto" and for the evening performance will be staged, "La Casa de la Troya", a wonderful stage adaptation in 4 chapters, of the novel of the same name by Alejan dro Pérez Lugín, whose adaptation is the author of the eminent Spanish comedian Don Manuel Linares Rivas. This work was premiered here, with extraordinary success by the Company of the Lara Theater of Madrid, directed by Don Emilio Thuillier.