ELMUNDO
Offices; ► Salvador Brau, 81 ; Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345 .................... ....
.10 pages 3 ctvs, Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50.
MORNING PAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
1 Publisked and distributed andar pansit (lio. 801) sntiioriwé "O u""" xe" 01 oetobst 6. 1"1T, on Hi u U, Poet Ottee ef i I San Juan, Porto Bieo. By order of the Procidont, A. 8. Bur loeon. Pootmastcr General Catered as second elaae matter, I O february SI. 191". at the Poet Offloe at Ban Juan, Porto Bloo. United Statoe of Aaerioe andar the Aat of maroh 8, 1ST* 0
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 3, 1921.
YEAR III.
r . SAN JUAN" PUERTO RICO.
NUMBER 862.
mo Republicans will back Mr. Moni. Roily in the restriction of "bill" Jones.
the republican delegation accompanying the governor carries a bill of incorporation.
The cablegrams published yesterday morning by the press, referring to Governor Kelly's intention to work in Washington for the restriction of the Jones bill, have caused an immense sensation in the political circles of this city, giving great importance to this matter, which has all the characteristics of the possible, since the cablegrams inserted yesterday in the afternoon newspapers, reported that in the Philippines they are trying to proceed in the same direction. Regarding this transcendental question, there are many opinions prevailing in all political camps. The Republicans-as we have been able to learn from the mouths of their most connoted two men-maintain that they will not support the Governor as far as the restriction of the Organic Charter is concerned, meaning that the delegation in Washington is instructed to endorse the Governor's policy as long as it does not infringe on the fundamental rights of the country, since this would be tantamount to a regrettable step backward. The Republican delegation accompanying Mr. Reily carries an important bill, which will be submitted to Congress for consideration, calling for the incorporation into the Union of the territory of Puerto Rico, on condition that it be ~ALMÁCEÑAJÉ At a price beyond all competition, they do so in the new, fireproof premises they occupy on the Malecón R. J. DELGADO & CO. S. en C. Office: Tanca 2. Telephone 1104. Warehouse: Malecón. San Juan, Puerto Rico. WE OFFER GRANULATED MARBLE for "Terrazzo" flooring, all colors, from $2-80 to $3 00, depending on color and number. Bag of 101 pounds. Quantity discount We have constant stock of Italian marble for tombstones, pantheons and stairs In the next steam we expect to receive eight artistic statues. Bartoli Art Studio Tetuan 1. Tel. 306. Box 1188.
leave the Government of the Island as it is presently constituted. Thus-Puerto Rico, they say, will have a better government than any other territory of the United States has ever had, and it will be a step closer to statehood. The bill was drafted by Messrs. Tons Soto, Puventud, Fe liú and Marchan. According to the Republicans, the spirit of this project is to extend to Puerto Rico all the powers of the American Constitution, in addition to other advantages of an economic and social nature which, according to them, the country would have. MANIFESTATIONS OF MR. HUYKE ABOUT A NEW PARTY Talk about the formation of a new Party that will integrate the moderate elements of the Union. We asked Mr. Huyke about this matter and he informed us that suggestions in this sense are coming from the island. -We have not yet acted," he told us. We prefer to give the battle to the Union. -What about Mr. Barceló? -Mr. Barceló will finally be fought by the same Unionist elements. Alegría had to fight him now, after what the Correspon sal of EL MUNDO reports that he said in the United States. We also fight him. He has great ability to entertain the Union well with protests, but the inevitable end The inevitable end is not being able to prevent the country from turning against him. The Union has its own elements of defense: ideas. When the ideas are discussed, the Union will impose itself. ' ' INTERVIEW AT THE FORTALEZA Yesterday he held a long interview with the Governor, Mr. Leopoldo Feliú, vice-president of the Re publican Party. IICÜBBS to RECEIVE! "BEAVER-BOARD" for divisions and ceilings. WHITE Zinc English "TWO LIONS" AND "HALF-MOON AND STAR" BRANCH WIRES Ask for Prices. sucsTde a. ma yol Veo.
"SWINEHART" TRUE REDUCTION SWINEHART TIRE & RUBBER CO. which manufactures the best rubbers in the United States, has made a great reduction in its prices. Exclusive Agents for Puerto Rico: Brunet Saenz & Co. Allen 92. Telephone 1057. San Juan, P. R.
Protect Your Health!
Consuming only the Cigarettes of the Country. "CASINO' "COLLECTIVA" "VIOLETAS" They have no chemical compositions. They do not have dust like others. Manufactured with all the modern advances. 25 years of experience is a guarantee for you. Porto Rican Am. Tobacco Co. of P. R. (MANUFACTURERS) San Juan, Puerto Rico.
A new price cut is expected soon 48 sugars
The sugar market during the past week has been sluggish mainly because of the prevailing rumor that the Cuban Committee intends to introduce a new contribution system to control 900,000 tons of sugars pertaining to the old crop remaining in Cuba. The second cause which has greatly disturbed the market is the rumor circulating that there is a bill before the Cuban legislature, calling for the government to seize over 200,000 tons of old crop sugars remaining in Cuba, dispose of them, and that the holders be rewarded at 2 c. per pound. ' On Saturday 765 tons of "SANTA i CRUZ'' sugars were sold at 3-15|16 c., i.e. with a 1|8 c. rebate from the previous selling price, and 690 tons of sugars from Venezuela at Z -1[4 c. On Monday 6,000 sacks from Puerto Rico were sold at 3-7|8 c. i.e. with a 1]16 rebate, *and 23,000 sacks from Cuba at 2-50. On Tuesday 36,350 bags of Cuba were sold at 2.50. The market is expected to decline somewhat further in the near future. It appears from general opinion that the refineries could obtain sugars subject to duty and for early arrivals at 2-1|4 c. However, there is no interest in the same. A LETTER FROM DR. FONT Y GUILLOT San Juan, P. R., December 2, 1921. Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. R. Distinguished sir and friend: In today's issue of EL MUNDO, there is an article with the title "No one knows who will be the next Chief of the Mmicomió" in one of whose paragraphs reads "The other candidate was Dr. Font, proposed by the Department. This nomination was not made either; since the Executive rejected it". Now, my dear sir, as a categorical correction to these statements, I believe it is pertinent to state that Dr. Font (and Guillot) was not nominated by the Department. Font (y Guillot) has not requested any position from the present Commissioner of Health, although this official, who distinguishes him with his friendship, spontaneously offered him one of the highest positions in the Department; an offer which, although he was grateful for it, he did not accept for powerful reasons of personal convenience; because it is not presumable in sound logic that Commissioner Dr. Lippitt, by his sole determination, would take his name to the Executive and the Executive would reject it. I beg your kindness to order this letter to be inserted in EL MUNDO, and in anticipation of your most expressive thanks, I am yours faithfully and S. 8. q. b. s. m. Dr. Eliseo Font y GUILLOT. Alonso Riera &co., Warehousemen, importers and exporters of Tobacco in Rama of all kinds and origins. OFFERS: Burlap (raw) for packing tobacco. Empty barrels for tobacco. Samson presses for packing tobacco. Empty sacks for sugar (next harvest). Prices on request. Warehouses and offices. "Tobacco Palace. San Juan, P. R. New York: 47 Washington St. We HAVE JUST RECEIVED A NEW SUPPLY OF # ISHOP. S | CALIFORNIA CANDY "| R. & CO. S. en C. Office*: Tanca 2. Tel. 1104 San Juan, P. R.
It is very possible that a biological aboratory will be established in Punce
The Department of Health is studying the matter concerning the establishment, in the city of Ponce, of a Biological Laboratory, mounted on the same level as the one located in the central office of this capital. According to reports reaching us, we learn that by prominent Republican personalities in the Southern city, the Department has been advised of the necessity of establishing in Ponce the said office. As our readers are aware, the Deputy Commissioner of Sanitation, Dr. Ma-' laret, who has long resided in Ponce, where he is closely connected with all elements of that population, seems to favor the idea, and at present, both he and the Commissioner, Dr. Lippitt, are negotiating how to proceed as soon as possible to grant Ponce the requested office. The Laboratory in question will be dedicated to the analysis of all diseases and annexed to the same will be established a small Laboratory of rats, for the analysis of all those that were captured in the south coast of the island, with which it will be possible to decongest the excessive work of the Laboratory that for this purpose was founded in San Juan. (Continued at 1" pl Sa.) DECEMBER 3 SATURDAY This is the day that the great shoe store EL TEREQUE will open its doors to the public, with a splendid assortment of footwear for ladies, men and children. Great* Novelties*// Great Surprises for the public, who will favor it with their presence. No lots. No old merchandise. Everything new and at prices of situation To the "TEREQUE" then, to buy good, nice and cheap. CRUZ Esq. a LUNA San Juan, P. R. Plisa and f orran buttons. A. CARAZO, Brau St 72.
Formidable "red" movement spreads eíWiena.
(By French Cable) VIENNA, Dec. 2. -Thousands of co monists went through the streets of the city yesterday in an aggressive attitude, initiating a formidable attack on the residences of the wealthy and the main hotels. While this was going on, hundreds of demonstrators gathered in front of the Parliament waving red flags. Both the hotels and the warehouses fell victim to the fury of the papu lacho, as all the furniture in the hotels was smashed and the warehouses looted. The first hotel attacked was the "Nvevo Bristol", where all the doors of the first three floors were smashed. The police seemed to sympathize with the movement, for they remained impassive in the face of the turbulent elements. Faced with the impossibility of containing the movement of the "Reds" by lack of police forces, the government mobilized army troops, managing to reestablish peace, after a furious hand-to-hand combat. The appearance of the main streets of the city is truly pitiful, as it seems that a horrendous hurricane has hit the most important city on the banks of the Da Nublo. THE MARK HAS RISEN CONSIDERABLY I BERLIN, December 2.-By virtue of the present relations between France and England, concerning the moratorium demanded by Germany, which England is willing to meet, the mark has risen considerably. At the opening of the Stock Exchange today, the mark was quoted at 980 per pound sterling, while at the closing it was quoted at 750. FRANCE TO OCCUPY THE LEFT RIVER OF THE RHINE ■ < I PARIS, December 2.-The French Government intends to apply for permission to occupy the left bank of the Rhine, in the event of the moratorium being granted to Germany. RAFAEL W. CAMEJO On the 5th of the present day will embark for Havana, in the steamship "Antonio Lopez", the most esteemed gentleman and triumphant poet Rafael W. Camejo. Mr. Camejo's trip to Cuba is due to business matters of the trading house "Nicolas Hernandez and Co." of this city, which has established a branch office in the sister Antille. EL MUNDO is pleased to inform its readers that in virtue of the absence of our highly educated friend, we have had the honor of appointing you correspondent editor in Cuba, from 4-mde will send us entertaining chronicles, palpitating with that winged grace andjratil that Camejo knows how to put in his> exquisite productions. to the excellent companion our#"<most cordial greetings d* despedidír and wish him happy travels. Gentlemen Duels of FORD Gomas Royal Cord 30 x 3 1¡2 . - The U. S- Tire Co. did not want to bring to market a Royal Cord 80 x 3 T|2 Clincher rubber, for Ford and other cars, because to date Cord rubbers in that size and flange type were not giving satisfactory results. After many tests, the U. S. now brings to the market the ROYAL CORD rubber in size 30 x 3 1|2 Clincher. This famous rubber can be obtained in our different warehouses in the Island and this capital, or directly from our establishment. PIETRANTONI & SOJO "La Tienda de Goma". - San Juan, P. R. QUINCALLEROS We have just received from the United States an enormous assortment in quincalla, lace and knitwear, which we want to make AT COST We dispatch packages by C. O. D. Sucesión de Roque González &CA. In front of "LA LINDA", Cruz 10.
Japan asks that all fortifications on the Corregidor Islands be dismantled.
THE ANGLO-JAPANESE PACT WILL DISAPPEAR BEING SUBSTITUTED BY ONE BETWEEN ENGLAND, U.S.A., FRANCE AND JAPAN.
VIA "ALL AMERICA CABLES" WASHINGTON, December 2, Japanese legates, desirous of obtaining the greatest advantages in the Far Eastern questions, have asked the Disarmament Conferences that the Corregidor Islands, which are known as the Gibraltar of the Pacific, should be dis- constituted as a more powerful block of defenses which make them impregnable. The American delegates have asked the full conference to abandon the Anglo-Japanese alliance in order to contribute to a more powerful bloc which will unite and harmonize the interests of the most powerful nations. At the same time they have suggested the formation of a vast alliance composed of the United States, England, Japan and France, in order to perpetually sustain the peace of the world. ' I MANY AMERICAN CITIZENS HAVE BEEN ATTACKED > IN VIENNA I . ' VIENNA, December 2.-On the occasion of the Great Event! "The Luck of a Viennese Ballerina" í Extraordinary film by LYA MARA that has caused such an enormous sensation in our public. Soon its premiere! * - CHECK IT OUT! THE BEST CLOTHING
the revolutionary storm that has been unleashed in this capital, countless large buildings have been turned into ruins by the furious multi, tud, which not only looted many hotels and large establishments, but driven by a design of destruction, quenched everything in its path, as it was pursued by the forces of the army. Numerous American citizens have been attacked in the public streets, for which they were forced to take refuge in the building of the embassy of the United States. z THE JURY WILL RULING TONIGHT ON THE OASO ARBUCKLE SAN FRANCISCO, December 2.- From one moment to another will end the famous process that is followed against the film artist Roscoe (Fatty) Arbuckle, because the Jury that has to decide the lawsuit has been meeting for several weeks. The friends of the well-known artist opened the most flattering hopes that this one will obtain his freedom, on the occasion of the favorable impression that has arisen during the trial of this noisy cause. 'Teatro America' Presents today premiere in P. R. to Helena Hemmersteln IN Whips or Kisses Extraordinary SELECTION Prices 35 cents Luneta. Two Lions" WHITE ZINC legitimate English ZINC, we have at unbeatable prices. Legitimate oil "ATLAHTIC" Paints "ADELITE" Hardware Clivillés - Tanca 2 and 4, Esq. to Tetuan. Phone 1108.
Society íOrand
"LA GLORIA"- V. ARRIVI CO. S. en C. ALLEN ESQ. SAN JUSTO.
get®.
TODAY- GALA SATURDAY | Puerto Rico Premiere ELSIE FERGUSON DAVID POWELL | in the six-act "Artcraft" drama "LA CULPA AJENA" |
TOMORROW SUNDAY, Puerto Rico Premiere EDITH ROBERTS £ with two other stars in the five-act drama "BONDAD".
CURRENT PRICES.
TAKE ADVANTAGE ■■ '.'Lm,. PRICES WITHOUT COMPETITION ' ■ In Roofing and Painting there is no one who can beat us. Fine Cemented Nails. Silk paper for fruit and bread. Staples, fence wire, wire gate for fences, and patios. Paris Green. Cars, Cars, Quitrines. ASK FOR INFORMATION AT STATE OF JOHN M. TURNER. Stop 2 and 112 Pia. da Tierra. San Juan, P. R.