ELMWNDO
10 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year, $7.50
Offices: I Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345 i
A.M. DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
HublmUed "nd dutnbuted under permit (Ño. SOI) eutborixed San Juan. Porto Rico. By order of the President. A S Bur fehruarr 21 1919 at the Poet Office at Ran Jni.n P-rto ÚJ
by the Act of October tí, 1917, un fiia *t the Fust Office oí -'-"n Pi "tmaster General. Entered gecond clan matter, T't i rod of Amorfa under the Act of march t. Uyt
NUMBER 601.
YEAR III
SATURDAY, JANUARY 29, 1921.
The Unionists win the Municipality of Fajardo.
SERIOUS MANIFESTATIONS MADE BY TRAVIESO Yesterday, at 10 o'clock in the morning, took possession, of his office of Commissioner of Public Service, Ledo. Martin Travieso. In the afternoon we visited the distinguished funcienario in his office at the City Hall, having conversed with him for a few moments. Upon our questions, Mr. Travieso informed us that he had found the administration in a deplorable condition, which showed that the outgoing administrators had acted in bad faith with the deliberate purpose, only, of creating difficulties for the new unionist administration. -My first job here is to make an extensive report detailing the conditions in which we have found all this. I intend to send this report to the Government, and it will also be published in the press in due time, so that the country may know the whole truth of the situation in which the previous administrators have left the municipality of San Juan. We," added Mr. Travieso, "have not come here to play games. If conclusive evidence is found against those who acted with bad intentions to harm us, I am willing to proceed in the courts against the criminals. Dr. Diaz, Commissioner of Health, who was present, stated that, of all the departments, the one in the worst condition was his own, adding that almost no medicines had been found in the pharmacies, and those that were found were in very bad condition. As for the public service tools, etc.," added Dr. Daíz, "the garbage carts were out of order, and there were evident signs in some of them that only bad intentions had moved the hand that had caused certain unspeakable damages. The Sanitation Department," Dr. Diaz told us, "has a debt of $6,000. The Board of Directors reported having found $7,000 in cash, with payment obligations of more than $40,000. Mr. Travieso was yesterday conferring at length with the Governor on all these matters. Yesterday afternoon the Board of Directors met again, having taken important* resolutions in relation to the same matters.
IMPORTS ON THE ISLAND HAVE DECREASED A LITTLE The other day, a local newspaper reported that the San Juan docks were no longer congested with merchandise, as in previous days. Indeed... The congestion has passed. Already a steamer arrives, and in a few days the workers unload it, and clean the wharf of "straw and dust....''. This did not happen before, when mountains of goods filled the docks and the Malecon, for days and weeks at a time... What is the cause? What is the cause? Is it that now there are more arms that are employed in removing them? These questions formulated this way, to ourselves, have had their answer through our own observations.... We would not want to be mistaken, lest we be accused of exaggerating things..... But the fact is that we have noticed that the importation into the island, both from the United States and from abroad, has decreased by a considerable percentage. ... And of course, as less merchandise enters the country, there must be less congestion at the docks. We can say that in the Federal Treasury, on the basis of the foregoing, the receipts of duties and taxes on foreign imports have decreased in the island..... And we believe it all the more because a high federal employee, related to that Department, is soon to embark for the United States, who, we are informed, is going to Washington on official business. The banks no longer open their coffers, with confidence, to the sugar growers, who have to resort to other procedures. In "mantle to the tobacco harvesters and coffee growers, it is not necessary to say. .The credit establishments have always treated of some rather badly and to the dens, worse. Commerce in general is suspicious. .... We know of houses, here in San Juan, that have lately cancelled several orders, and others have had their credit shortened in the North. We are not trying to alarm anyone..... We are merely stating the fact. For that reason ' we think it goes without saying anything that anyone, who has not had the trouble to go out into the street to find out, can say, putting our disinterested observations in question, FAJARDO UNIONISTA
"KIRSCHBAUM" WOOL SUITS nice colors and fashionable cuts lately received from $60 and $75 to $45.00 from $40 and $50 to $27.50 from $30 and $35 to $24.50 from $28 and $32 to $20.00 WATERPROOF COATS all styles from $15.00 to $9.95 from $12.50 to $8.34 Caps, Hats, Shirts, Ties, Socks and others at special prices.
Latest wires from New York: \ ' "Sales of sugar from Cuba made for next shipment at $3. 7 8 eos to freight. ' ' "Quantities had offered of j Same at §4 cost, freight, no buyers." CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT THE MARKET In the raw sugar market there have been during the last few days visi- i bles variations. The sugar holders are uneasy about the present price of the product, as there are large quantities of sugars for sale, both for the present and the last harvest.
The sugar cane growers.
(By telegraph) Fajardo, January 28. EL MUNDO, San Juan The honorable District Court of Humacao today resolved the Fajardo electoral lawsuit, declaring the plaintiffs who were Unionist candidates elected to the Municipal Assembly. Ir.menso rejoicing public opinion of Fajardo. Labor Ledo. Cuevas Zequeira splendid, for his activity and brilliant for his great intellectual and legal resources. LUIS DE CELIS. DENUNCIAS PRACTICED They were denounced by the police, for driving automobiles without being authorized: Alfredo Gámbaro, Rafael Pesquera. Vicente Pérez Díaz and Rodrigo García. Two trucks collided on Tanca Street, one of which was damaged. CROWNS AND DIADEMAS FOR CARNIVAL QUEENS ' We have a great variety from $12 to 100.00 one. "PARIS BAZAR" P GIUSTI & Co.
Theater "America" TODAY SATURDAY BIG FUNCTION CINEMA AND VARIETIES AT 25 Cts Miss Ruth CLIFFORD in the "The Invisible Ray" Episodes 4 and 5 and the comedy Love and Gasoline and the comic Duet The Modernists with amazing works in dances, Couplets, monologues, dialogues and songs. Matinee with the evening movie at 10 and 15 cents Tomorrow Sunday:-Matinee and matinee. In the evening the drama "VENGEANCE FULFILLED A" and great comic acts by the artists 'LOS MODERNISTAS'. -Prices Corrientes-"THE AMERICA" IS HIS THEATER It is plied and lined buttons, * A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt.
fu 1 ■¡WTL
Steamship-Schooner " Mystery" To be dispatched WEDNESDAY, Feb. 2, for Macon" and Santo Domingo. Admits Cargo and Passengers For information Antilles Trading Company. Offices in front of dock No. 2, Telephone 1042, San Juan, P. R.
(By French cable) PARIS, January 28--Delegates to the Peace Conference have held several private interviews on the war indemnity. Count d'Esforza; Lloyd George and other prominent personalities held some preliminary interviews. -Briand and Loucher have exchanged impressions with the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs. It appears that the Belgian delegation is endeavoring to reconcile the French point of view with the English, which will mean that if no agreement is reached, the Belgian experts will be able to make some of what the Belgian delegation is trying to do.
EARN SOME OF WHAT WE LOSE Effective Discounts of 40 to
"PALM-BEACH" GENUINE cut and sew special from $16 and $18 to $13.75 from $12 and $14 to $ 9.95 DÉ CASIMIR Pore Weave Suits Manufactured by Kirschbaum for $25.00 Now S I 1.50 -X-NAPPING PANTS from $14.50. to $ I 0.0U from $12.00 to $ 8.50 GONZALEZ OTlÑTO? San Juan, Poner, .Mayagüez.
ROUGH SILK SUITS latest styles in ''Chic" cut and sew from $36 and $40 to $25.00 PURE THREAD SUITS White and Ecru from $40 and $45 to $30.00 FINE ALPACA SUITS Light-Weight from $32 and $37 to $20.00 Children's Clothes, Suspenders, Pajamas. Underwear at very low prices.
The sugar slump is getting more and more accentuated.
It is noted that buyers do not want to anticipate buying large quantities, beyond their needs, (due to the many factors which tend to irregularize the situation and the fact that the harvest has begun. j It has been estimated by competent authorities in the field that this year will have an excess of 2,079,826 tons of sugar over last year's harvest. The refined sugar market remains in line with crude. Most of the r.adores, -we are informed, - are operating on the basis of 7 or a little less, with a two per cent 'discount,. As for the latter, more stable prices are
The news that Japan had bought the product at a discount of two per cent, and that the prices were more stable, because the retailers have little stock of the product in their warehouses, was reported to us. The news that Japan had bought 50,000 tons of sugar from China and that Chinese speculators would buy 390,000 tons from Java made an excellent impression on the market at first, because it was thought that this sugar, when subtracted from European and American consumption, would affect the subsequent price of the product. But this has not been the case. There are different opinions about the current market depression' Some believe it is the excess of pro. Others see the games 'bars of Machiavellian hands.
La Hija de Borinquen Our old establishment has been stocked with new articles and new PRICES, and we beg our select clientele to visit us, certain that they will obtain greater advantages and styles of more novelty than what they have known up to now. : : : : A. M. Somoza CSk Cía. SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
For Carnival Buy early and choose the most beautiful in costumes and dance outfits. Latest new and x great novelty styles. P. Schira & Co.
Jf
Germany hides numerous cannons
The allies are to meet in Brussels to make Germany pay. -It has been agreed that the next meeting of experts s ca held at "The Preferred by People of Taste" presents today the PREMIERE in Puerto Rico "De Picos Pardos" drama in 5 act/ with. Enid Bennett PRICES COf RIHNTES f i í ' " >
February next, in London. -The question of gue rra compensation still continues to be discussed. "Le Terns' ' ' announces that considerable cannon have been uncovered in Germany, among which are numerous very powerful howitzers. -The former head of the Greek Government, Venizelos, has arrived in Greece. Venizelos comes at the invitation of Lloyd George, who wishes to consult the former head of the Greek government about the Orient. THE "SANTA ELEONORA'' By the sixth of next month the American transport "Santa Eleonora", coming from New York, is expected.
THE SITUATION OF THE WORKERS HAS BECOME UNBEARABLE. Prudencia Rivera Martinez, one of the labor leaders, yesterday answered a few questions put to him by a reporter of EL MUNDO, regarding the general conditions of the workers in the country, in these times of abnormality that the island is going through. - The reporter said that he was not aware of the low wages and unemployment in some industries. .... j -¿- - - ? -At the present time there are some 12,000 workers throughout the island who are out of work. This is due to the crisis announced by the corporations of the country. i -There is no reason to lower the rate of the jemales at which the workers were paid last year, since they were agreed upon on the basis of the price of seven and eight dollars per quintal of sugar. .... . And then the product came to be worth more than S20 . .
-The workers and the country in general will not be able to withstand it for long. - The workers and the country in general will not be able to resist it for long. | So far we know that there have been outbreaks of strikes in Guánica and Añasco, where the employers have reduced wages. -No, sir. The "Free Federation'' has had and has nothing to do with the aforementioned strike movements. The "labor unions" of the island have been given broad powers to act and solve their problems. They may or may not declare a strike on the employers at any time. ■ _¿. -?' - -At present, I have reports that in Yabucoa is where the best wages are being paid to the workers, for, I have been told, they go over 82 a day, sometimes reaching as much as three dollars The lowest wages on the island are paid today in Guanica and Fajardo. -The "Free Federation", for the good of the workers, has sent, as in other years, communications to the sugar mills, which had agreements with the workers, inviting them to renew their contracts with them, so that they may have the same wages of the previous year. IN THE "PHOTOPLAY" - Honor and respect to all those per' sonas who are creditable, as our i kind and zealous administrator, double ' active in the progress of that great Company, which will be one of the most important enterprises of our beloved Bo. It is our duty to make known to the public when there is a manager who is interested in the workers.
It is our duty to let the public know when there is a manager who is interested in the workers, as long as they are creditable and punctual in the fulfillment of their duty. If they were all like that, how much trouble many corporations would be spared! I Before I finish, I remember the old man, as we affectionately call him in the workshops, the nice and good Mr. (Fransworth, with his character h-Cagueño, entering like a sword in a bullring or bullfight. He stops, extends his eyes to all of us and visits each one of us, saying: "it is good" How? So I can not finish if later appears the distinguished gentleman Don Enrique Gonzalez with his character of old military with his soldiers: he hears a complaint, stops and orders to attend to his people with the greatest care. In short, this is all complacency and good treatment. But it is not possible to finish, because a group of distinguished gentlemen arrives, led by the gentlemanly Mr. Lee, founder of a large firm in this square. A gentleman who has been extremely sympathetic to our working class; always in his place of honor, both at present and in times not so long ago, and very distinguished in the working class centers for his good character and frankness. In short, all these men seem to have been expressly chosen, for which we congratulate ourselves, wishing them a good success, as it will be for Puerto Jíco and for the Company. LAUREL
REVOLUTION THREATENS TO DESTROY EVERYTHING IN ITALY ROME, January 28. -The news reaching this city about the situation in the principal towns of the Peninsula is very alarming and I fear that, in spite of the efforts made by the troops to avoid tumults, riots may break out everywhere. In Milan, where the revolutionaries have adopted agreements that make one fear all sorts of horrible acts, numerous workers who were aviators during the war seized a dozen airplanes and launched thousands of communist manifestos. In Genoa, the workers captured several armored cars, belonging to the Government, and were masters of the city for several hours, withdrawing afterwards. Thousands of soldiers sent by the Government occupied the main parts of the city and guarded the main buildings, as it was feared that serious attacks might occur. MILAN - "II Secolo", one of the most important newspapers in Italy, assures that in Turin there have been bloody collisions between the soldiers and the revolutionaries. Due to the superiority of the troops, the revolutionaries had to retreat. There were numerous wounded and several dead. "II Secolo" adds that they have been searched, do numerous houses perteifecieiries to suspected persons, finding it a large number of rifles, as well as tavi bién. boaibas-atestadas áe explosi'■o 1 ".""" THE "BOLSHEVIKI" MOVEMENT IS SPREADING WITH AMAZING SAPIDITY IN ITALY ROME, January 28.-In Milan. Turin. Genoa, Bologna, Naples and Trieste the communist propaganda spreads in such a way that it is believed impossible to stop the movement. In Turin and Milan the revolutionaries have seized numerous factories and have entrenched themselves around them, setting up all the defenses hitherto known. Among the defenses are electric wire fences, and there are known to be factories mined by the workers leading the revolution. Several cities are engaged in the manufacture of firearms PARIS -The correspondent of "Le Temps" in Milan says that in several Italian cities firearms of all kinds are being manufactured. The soldiers are searching all the redoubts and suspicious places, and have ascertained that the revolution is about to break out in some provinces.
LAST HOUR i IMPORTANT CABLE Sao Paulo, Brazil. Tide Water Oil Co. New York, N. Y. Chavez, Brazilian Army Aviator states that VEEDOL Oil helped him succeed in breaking the record long distance flight Rio de Janeiro-Buenos Aires. The best lubricating oil for all kinds of engines. Representatives for Pto. Rico, The Union Commercial Corporation SAN JUAN PONCE MAYAGÜEZ TO AVOID THE COLD ■I -t~ Ask for a sweater at the Bazar Velázquez. There are all sizes and pro dos. Phone 867. ®ox 1318 San Juan, P. R.