ELMSNDO
r ■■ nrr na i ■ , 8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One affid, $.7.50
Offices; I Salvador Brau, 81 j Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) authoriied by the Act of October 6, 1917, on file at the Post Office of San Juan. Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. S. Bur leson, Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter, H february 21. 1919. at'the Post Office at Ran Juan, Porto ,Ri co. United States of America under the Act of march 3, 1879.
SATURDAY, JANUARY 22, 1921.
NUMBER 595
THEATER "HUERICA".
Tonight big party dedicated in honor of the famous American artist Miss Ruth CL1FFOHD Who will be presented personally to the public, addressing the audience. The film The Invisible Ray, starring Miss Ruth Clifford, will be shown. Early attendance to the show is requested. There will be two batches 7:30 and 9 o'clock. THE SOCIAL CLASSES OF SAN JUAN SHOULD FLOOD THE THEATER TONIGHT TO PAY A TRIBUTE OF SIMPATHY AND ADMIRATION TO THE BIG STAR, TODAY FROM THE STAFF OF PORTO RICO PHOTOPLAYS, INC. CURRENT PRICES Afternoon matinee with evening program. Tomorrow, Sunday, matinee and evening with the film "The Marital Abyss" by Frank Mayo. In the afternoon, matinee for children. In Catano there is no smallpox Co" motive of certain rumors that circulated about the existence of smallpox in Cataño, the doctor Ortiz, of the Department of Insular Health, moved yesterday to this town, practicing the corresponding investigation. The distinguished doctor informed us shortly after his return from Cata ño that the circulating rumors were completely unfounded, since the only thing he found there were 5 sick people with chicken pox, which the populachera fantasy of the people was already beginning to call "terrible cases of African smallpox". It remains, then, in berlin about the smallpox in Cataño. * What we can report, because we checked yesterday, is that a little over a month ago landed in Sari Juana, from New Orleans; an individual named Hugh Steward, a native of Honduras, of color,' who two days after being here, was admitted, by order of the Maritime Health, in the hospital Cuaren tenario, attacked by smallpox. Dr. del Valle told us yesterday that this had been a case of benign smallpox and that the patient had already been discharged. As to a probable importation of the terrible epidemic into the island, Dr. del Valle believes that there is no danger, as there are few relations between Haiti, the infected country, and the island. Only one steamer every two months. And every time it comes, it is subjected to a thousand sanitary requirements that "clean it of straw and dust''. With respect to Havana, where there was also smallpox, the doctor assured us that the disease had been completely suffocated, and that at present there were only cases of the epidemic in Santiago de Cuba. In any case, what science and custom also advise is that, to make sure that we are contagion-proof, we inject ourselves with the vaccine. SUGAR MARKET - Sugar cable. Wareny, speculators, Bought 25,000 sacks of sugar from Cuba, soon shipping at $4 3|8, cost, freight. Federal bought 2,000 tons from Puerto Rico afloat at $5.39 cost freight .and insurance."
MR. HARDING SAYS HE DOESN'T WANT INAUGURAL PARTY
At the express wish of the President-elect, Mr. Harding, according to reports from Marion, there will be no special celebration on the occasion of the inauguration of the executive, as had been thought. Mr. Harding has telegraphed Senator Knox, chairman of the senatorial committee, and of the committee on festivities, making known to them his desire that the money intended to be spent on such public rejoicings be spared, as the future president wants the ceremony to be as simple as possible. The recent discussion in the Senate between Senator Knox and Senator Borah on the subject of expenditures, greatly displeased Mr. Harding. The present anxious situation in various orders of national life, prompted by the increasing scarcity of labor and the industrial situation, is not, in Harding's judgment, the most suitable for indulging in festivities of any kind. It is almost certain that the Senate, as well as the other parties interested in the matter, will have to agree to the wishes expressed by the new president. Here is the telegram addressed by Mr. Harding to Senator Knox: j "Senator P. C. Knox, chairman of committee, Washington, D. C. 'I have not wished to intrude, giving my opinion concerning the plans for my inauguration, but I cannot but break my silence, in obeisance to circumstances and misapprehensions, which I must avoid. Please convey to your committee my sincere desire that the simplest of programs be adopted for my inauguration, which I would like to adhere to the oath of office and the official speech. "I most respectfully request that Congress will not vote any funds for that purpose, and that your committee will not expend any money for that purpose. I am familiar with the custom of erecting a platform with seats for the guests who are to witness the ceremony in the Capitol, but I should be more pleased if the ceremony could take place within the Capitol, or on the east portico, with great simplicity and without any extraordinary preparations. This will not require any expense, and we will give an example of economy and simplicity that can be fruitful for the process of normality that we are all pursuing. I have addressed a message, in the same sense, to the committee of festivities, requesting the abandonment of all the steps in favor of a parade and dance, hoping that my indications will be acceded to in grace to the motive that inspires them. Werren G. HARDING." The message to the chairman of the inaugural committee, is identical in spirit, although the wording varies slightly, thanks being given in it, moreover, to the said committee for their good wish and tra lows. TODAY-Puerto Rican premiere-HOY Billie Burke in the 6-act comedy Corriendo tras la Novia PRECIOS CORRIENTES | DR. L. LOPEZ DE LAROSA | X Five years of practice as a physician and surgeon of the best g g g Hospitals in the United States, or g g CONSULTATIONS g g g From 11 a. m to 1.30 p m g g g And from 4 p. m to 6 p. m. g p Free for the poor, Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays from 7.30 to 8.30 A X a. m. g TO AVOID THE COLD -i - Ask for a "sweater" at the Velazquez Bazaar. There are all sizes and pre dos. Telephone 867. TIO Box 1318 San Juan P. R.
( BY FRENCH CABLE) WASHINGTON, Jan. 21. -The Republican Senator from California, Mr. John son has proposed that an investigation be made into the military expedition sent by the United States to Siberia The Senator has leveled serious charges against the initiators of the said em. The resolution submitted for that reason was sent to the Committee on Foreign Relations, which postponed it. Late reports add that Senator Johnson has also asked that an investigation be made into the results obtained by the American merchants after the sending of the aforesaid troops to the aforesaid Russian possession. AGRICULTURAL WORKERS' MEETING TOMORROW Tomorrow an assembly of agricultural workers will be held, of the 8 who work in the sugar industry of the country. The main object of the meeting is related to the wages to be requested by the workers from the employers during the present harvest. The workers say that they will act in accordance with the provisions of the "Tenth Labor Congress", following the guidelines set by the Executive Council of the "Free Federation", but that this fact in no way means that they will remain indifferent, since they wish to raise and discuss with the bosses the basis of the new labor contracts to be made.
Senator Johnson addresses serious charges to the Government
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC TERMINATES HIS CONFERENCES MARION (Ohio) January 21.-M Har. ding has finished his lectures on the policy he proposes to pursue during his term of presidency. Today, Thursday afternoon, Mr. Harding will leave for Florida, where he will remain until the day he relieves Mr. Wilson and enters the White House. WASHINGTON, Jan. 21.- By a vote of 197 to 77, the House of Representatives has refused to increase the number of members in this legislative body. -The purpose of this corporation is to aid in the development of industries, as well as in foreign trade. To the owners of Trucks We are pleased to inform you that we have already received the Kelly Springfield Caterpillar 3 6 x 12 go mas that you have requested so much. Porto Rico Commercial Corp. Tanca Esq. Tetuán. Sn Juan, P. R. THE BEST QUALITY Dutch "Edam" ball cheese, superior cream, has just been received by F J. Rodriguez. Ask for prices or call TeL 1123, P. O Box 994% Tetuan, esq. Cristo San Juan. I can serve or. denes C. O D. Advt.
COPENHAGEN, Jan. 21.-The Danish industry is facing a very critical situation, as most of the factories are not working, but only to meet the orders they receive from the interior. The others have had to close their doors and lay off all the workers. The docks are still completely overcrowded with foreign goods. The State Department officially reports that the Persian government has concluded the treaty with the "Bolshevikis". According to the clauses of this agreement Persia cedes to the "red" government all the concessions that Persia had made to the government of Nicholas IIEL DR. RAMON M. SUAREZ In the steamer "Guantanamo" arrived in San Juan, coming from the Dominican Republic, the very prestigious physician Dr. Ramon M. Suarez, together with his distinguished wife and daughter, who are, respectively, daughter and granddaughter of our good friend Don Jesus Benitez Castaño, sub-commissioner of the Interior. Dr. in Medicine and Surgery D. Ramon M. Suarez is a graduate of Richmond, Virginia, with excellent marks, has practiced his profession and accredited his name for three years in San Pedro de Macoris, R. D., having won many awards there. He has been appointed a Charity Physician in Santurce. We send the most affectionate greetings of welcome to Dr. Suarez and feiiei--tamos to Santurce, given the prestige enjoyed by the excellent physician.
1 ■ - Substantial Discounts on Men's Clothing
"Ho leproof" silk socks all co'o- - - _ res from $1-50 par to $1.00 "Holeproof" mercerized socks in all -- colors, from $1.00 par....i *"5 Cotton I "Holeproof" socks in all colors from 75 c. par . a -5U "Holeproof" openwork silk socks, all i nr lo" colors $2.00 par 1.Z5 S Silk socks, fancy ■ styles, all - _ ■ ■ colors, $1.50 and $2-00 - 1-Uu
Interiot "Reis" interiot clothing better made 'n finished than any other, T-shirts and all- __ two the tañíanos at 75 C Union Suits "Reis" the best that are imported, all fts sizes at 55c Also fine irtes at $1-25 v $1.50 suit. FINA9 Precious colmes at 75 c., S1.00 and $1.50. Gonzalez Padin Co, Inc SAN JUAN - PONCE . MAYAGÜEZ
Blue workers shirts, blue color with collar, from $1.50 and f 2.00 . a > .90-1.10 White Negligee shirts with collar superb quality from $2.50 and $3.50 to 1.50 and 2. 1 Fine Soiessette Negligee shirts with collar, from $3.Shirts of extra quality - precious co ors of $1.50 and $2.50 1.00 and 1.50 1.00 and 1.50 Long pants with knitted stripes, military style "Ganga" ... ... a .bOyl.vv
Secretary of laciniada, Mr. Daniels, judges Japanese incident very serious
WASHINGTON Jan. 14-From the text ¡ of a dispatch received by the departa. | From the text of a dispatch received by the Department of the Navy, it appears that Japan has been administering Via-Divostock as a military possession. In his dispatch, Admiral Gleaves says: *General Oi has issued orders to all garrisons that the sentries are not to stop the Americans. All Japanese officers of high rank have been on board and expressed their sorrow, stating that the sentry who killed Langdon was very ignorant. General Oi has sent a large wreath. *Vice Admiral Kawahara has sent the following telegram from Tokyo: "I am deeply shocked by the news of Lieutenant Langdon's death. Please accept my sincere condolences, although my word may lessen your sorrow.
|I am deeply sorry to hear of the death of Lieutenant Langdon. I regret very deeply the ir.farsto event." "Almost all-Ies undertakings of foreign I /cbíernos have visited us, ¡i as the Russian admiralty, parí ex. lend us their sympathy, sorrow and horror 1 in their own name and in. that of their i government. The inquiry i.o has canI cluded yet. Here it is said that the Japanese government i intends to state that the Lang don tárjente wore a hood and that in. tentatively the Japanese sentry identified him c! lieutenant' which is only ur.i 1 variant of the Japanese verdion that the officer made fúego first to the centi-i [reía. No explanation has been given as to the fact that the officer was wounded by the skirmish. While the comments are being reviewed, Secretary Daniels characterizes the incident as a serious matter and will immediately forward to the Department of State a report on the incident.
It is believed both here and in Tokyo that the incident will lead to discussion of Japan's right to maintain patrols in the streets of Via Dostock, it being understood in Washington that Japan has agreed not to interfere with the local government. If it is doing so, the death of Lieutenant Lang. lor, aggravates the matter under the international point of view ■ The United States has already protested ¡to Japan for the occupation of the ' Saghalien Islands without permission of law and it is believed that this particular case will demand from I that country categorical replies as to. I as to the right to administer the mu . nicipality of Vladivostok, which is Russian terri ' torium.
The Daughter of Borinquen Our old establishment has been stocked with new articles and new PRICES, and we beg our select clientele to visit us, certain that they will obtain greater advantages and styles of more novelty than they have known up to the present. A. M. Somoza Cía. SAN JUAN, ... PUERTO RICO.
PUERTO RICAN FAMILY STARVES TO DEATH.
The Brooklyn police have learned of the plight of a Puerto Rican family there. All the family members are starving to death. Morris Englebardt, who lives on Third Avenue, heard a knock at the door. When he opened the door he saw that it was a boy, no older than seven, named Charles Aran. The poor child told ' Edglebardt that his family was starving The American followed the boy and 'laughed at Pedro Aran, his wife and their three daughters: Lola, aged ten and six; Rosa, aged 8, and Carmin, aged 20. They were all lying on the floor, and their faces showed the lack of food. In the room there was no fire, nor any furniture, so Engle, [bardt had to bring them coal to make a fire, and some fruit. He then called Policeman Quinlan, of the Fourth Avenue station, to take them to a hospital. The surgeon said that the family was suffering from lack of food and poisoning, r.amiento Lola was the only one who spoke English, and said that the day before they had been forced to sell the ju. The day before, she said, they had been forced to sell the girls' ju. With the proceeds from the sale they bought canned meat, from which they made soup. When they woke up the next day, they felt severe pain. Policeman Quinlan gave from his pocket two dollars to buy them all. ments. In the opinion of the >:irujano, they should be sent to a nursing home, as the hospital cannot take them. This Puerto Rican family is the descendants of Spaniards and are in a position to care little about living or dying. The police captain, James Guillen, looks for work for the father and the two older girls. Despite the conditions they are going through, you can see that the girls are quite pretty. The family arrived in New York a month ago, for they wish to share in the prosperity of America. (Translated from the "New York Journal"). This is horrible," adds the excellent and generous young Puerto Rican Don E. Victor Fiol Ramos, who sent us the newspaper from which we translated the following lines, "And what is most disturbing," he adds, "is the little attention given to such desolate cases by people who call themselves dignified and deceitful. Mr. Fiol is investigating the case, in order to gather and send the socarros with all haste. The cafe of Fermín Cruz, in the "Perla", was broken into, and the thieves took 14 cartons of cigarettes valued at $20 and about $30 in cash UNIVERSAL Presents tomorrow Sunday at the "RIALTO" the famous actor William Desmond in the drama in 6 acts . VENGEANCE FULFILLED CURRENT PRICES CROWNS AND DIADEMAS FOR CARNIVAL QUEENS We have a great variety from $12' to $100.00 one. "PARIS BAZAR" P GIUSTI & Co. 1 ' i I GASOLINE I superior quality brand "M0T0R1NE" - s i 1 : Prices without competition. : jSTUBBE BROS, Inc. | I TANCA 9-SAN JUAN, P R. ||' IttnlHmttUUIIHUIMtftHmHHHIHIIItHlllimtlIlllilUIIHMIMtiMH* > 1 1 1 Button plating and lining. < A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt.
FBANCIfi SE MIIE
The a 1 aiming news which about the preparation of have lately been circulated by the United States, Japan and England, have caused the French Republic to sound the alarm. The most important thing for France is to be able to build a navy to serve as an intermediate power between the great squadrons of Great Britain and North America," declared Admiral Fournier, former commander of the French Navy. We must give preference," added the Admiral, "to light and battle cruisers, for they are the most powerful weapons known, and at the same time, they answer the main needs: speed and power." "First of all we must build a very powerful squadron composed of torpedo boats, torpedo fighters and submarines to protect our coasts." The pretensions of Japan, England and the United States make disarmament impossible, as well as the reduction of armaments. Japan now possesses the third largest squadron and its naval program will ensure that it does not lose this position. The legislatures of Washington, Tokio, London and Paris are only thinking of passing laws which will make their respective countries the most powerful on the water. i ' ' - ' - and . í Puerto Rico and Ml Harding (Translated from the "New York Evening Journal - ' ') MARION, (Ohio), January 11. The nomination of a Puerto Rican for Governor of Puerto Rico has been requested of the President-elect, Mr. Harding, by the Resident Commissioner of that island in Washington, Felix Cordova Davila, and Don Antonio Earcelo, President of the Senate of Puerto Rico, both submitted for Mr. Harding's consideration the candidacy of Martin Travieso, who was acting Governor. Mr. Córdova Dávri.r "e expressed himself as follows: "Our supreme aspiration is to have a sawmill governor with the wishes of the people. Under present conditions, the island has a House of Representatives and a Senate, both of which are elected by popular vote; but the Governor, the Auditor and the Commissioner of Instruction are appointed by the President of the United States. Our system of government gives many powers to the Governor, which diminishes the power of the legislators. Mr. Córdova Dávila said that he would be happy if he were appointed Governor of the United States, and that he would be happy if he were appointed Governor of the United States, which gives many powers to the Governor, which disempowers the legislators, I want to make it public to the notable surgeon Lean dro Lopez de la Rosa, for the very difficult operation he performed on my wife Gregoria Sotomayor, who had been suffering from a cruel illness in her belly for about 4 years. The operation was successfully performed at the MIRAMAR Clinic, giving the ether the master of the practitioners, Mr. Fijóo. My wife is already at home, in full convalescence, and she owes it to Dr. de la Rosa, who in spite of his youth, is already at the forefront of his class. I have no words with which to express my gratitude, which I make public, even if it hurts the magnificent surgeon's mood. "Ramon ECHEVARRY. San Juan, January, 1921.