ELM@NDO
£MM*8ai""fi*miiiHaaMmMm*M "it "9MiitHta "e"(>mafi "esM9"("eeMM Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 j Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345 -MaaaaaaaeaaaaiaataMMMMMMMaaMaaaMeuaMaateaaaaaaiaaatteaaaeeaaaeeaeetauaaaaa*
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
MORNING PAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR 111
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Published and distributed nadar permit (No. 801) eutborised by the Act of October 6, 1811, on file at tn. ro "i Mine. u r fian Juan. Porto Rieo. By order of the President, A. S. Bur Latvian, Postmaster General. Entered as second elate matter -I febroery 31. 1919. at the Post Office at Ban Juan, Porto Bi eo United Atate, of Ameriee nnder the Act of march *. 1879
SATURDAY, MARCH 5, 1921.
T NUMBER 630.
The momentous speech delivered yesterday by President W. G. Hardinz in front of the Capitol in Washington.
WARREN G. HARDING
New President of the great Republic, over whose shoulders weigh the most delicate and complicated problems, which could not be solved by the Wilson administration.
COHrtSTANDING THE INSULTS LAUNCHED AGAINST PUERTO RICO, a strong and PAiRITICAN RESIDENT IN NEW YORK.
The highly esteemed young Puerto Rican Don Rafael Jorge Gatell deserves the applause of all Puerto Rico for having defended him dignifiedly and courageously in the columns of the New York Times against the ignoble and unjust attacks directed against our country by Mr. Louis S. I Delaplaine Jr. in the edition of the renowned New York newspaper of February 23rd of last year. Here is, in case readers do not remember the insults directed to Puerto Rico by Mr. Delaplaine, the way he expressed himself: L j "PORTORRICANS ARE DISGUSTED THEY DO NOT APPRECIATE THE EFFORTS OF UNCLE 8AM TO MAKE THEM HEALTHY PEOPLE The native Puerto Rican is the greatest mongrel there is on earth, according to Louis S. Delaplaine Jr, I who was previously with the U.S. Consular Service in South: America and has just returned from an extensive visit to the island of Puerto Rico. He says that these people are a mixture of different races that have never amalgamated, and thus form a peculiar com. bination. Puerto Rico as regards its scenery is magnificent," said Mr. Déla plains, who is staying at the "Ho. tel Pennsylvania," "but to look at it as a single tourist, shutting one's eyes to the conditions prevailing there, for if one realizes them, it is very different. The United States receives no thanks from the natives for all it has done for them. It has spent millions of dollars to turn their unusable roads into CREOLINE (DISINFECTANT) We have just received and offer for immediate aatroga. DROGUERIA Serra, Garabis & Co. Tanca 11 r - - San Juan -
roads, on which you can travel with some comfort. He has tried to en señarles hygiene to live with de. cencía, and to pay the Americans I have whistled the American flag, and I have ' heard said the most unpleasant things I of the Americno people. - The native Puerto Rican has very po eos desires to be civilized, and the condi. clones of the present generation are appalling. The country is overcrowded with poor, ill-fed children. The meat is des. ■ known in their diets, unless i is not that of the squalid cattle which they have . and which, in my opinion, is not ds suitable for consumption by any per. j sona. There is hardly any butter, and the chief ali- ¡ ment is rice and beans ■ Ha people are filthy, and all cia prevail. It is of skin diseases''. The most worthy gentleman Don Rafael Jor ge Gatell, justly indignant, sent to the editor of the "New York Times'' the following letter: "I have read in today's edition of your paper several statements made by L S. Delaplaine Jr. who was previously in the U.S. Consular Service in South America. These statements refer to the conditions now prevailing on the island of Puerto Rico. In all that is said there is a lack of truth, and there seems to be an intention to create a false impression of this country of what we really are. Fortunately, many Americans of common sense have visited the island during the past j years and do not share in the least, the opinion of this gentleman. (Continued on page 3.) i "INDIAN" GOAL FOR SANTO DOMINGO capital) Saturday, March' 5, admits cargo and passengers. Antilles Trading Co. telephone 1042.
A baptism of sacrifices and blood maintains the Republic "We do not want to direct the'destinies of the peoples of Europe. We do not want to be compromised. We will not accept any responsibility, except as determined by our conscience and judged so by our mind."
Fellow citizens: When one looks at the world around him after a great storm, he realizes the signs of destruction, and yet rejoices in the strength of the things that survived the catastrophe, and if he is a true American, he breathes a clear atmosphere with a rare mixture of sorrow and new hope. We have been the nation on which the world has poured its fury, but we behold our public Re unshaken and our civility unscathed. Liberty within the law is inseparable from it, and though both were "threatened, we have now secured them; and therefore there comes to us the deep conviction that our representative government is of the highest expression and guarantee that can exist. At the present moment, I am overwhelmed by the solemnity of this occasion, feeling emotions of giving myself up, even though I do not feel the great weight of responsibility that Li faith in the divine inspiration of the founding fathers of the fatherland produces in me. It is unquestionable that there are gods who have protected this new Republic. Ours is an unambiguous organism, and we have achieved this with a biujism of
We have achieved it with a biujism of sacrifices and blood, making the union and maintaining our supreme nation in the concert that inspires it. We have seen the civil and religious liberty of mankind fulfilled and glorified. We see today that our political and social institutions remain unshaken, shielding an example of civilization and liberty for all mankind. Let us emphasize how our devotion and reverence for its immortal principle and our faith in its supreme fulfillment are renewed and strengthened. The material and spiritual progress of our Republic proves how intelligent is the policy of not meddling in the affairs of the Old Continent, and trusting in our ability to carry out our destinies, we zealously guard our right to do so without having to direct the des'iaps of the peoples of Etaíbpa. we wish to see ourselves engaged. We will accept no responsibility except as determined by our conscience and judged by our mind. Our eyes will never be closed to the development of danger; our ears will not remain deaf to the call of civilization. |
We recognize the new order established in the world with the closest ties to which progress has led us. We feel the cry of the heart of Humanity, which is for fraternity and co-optation of all. We want friendship and friendly ports. But America, our America, the America founded by our inspiring fathers, must not know of permanent military alliances; it will not enter into any political aggru pation nor assume any economic obligation that subjects its decisions to any other than its own authority. I am sure that our people will not fail to understand us and that the world will not misinterpret us. It is not our thought to prevent close and cordial relations. We believe ourselves to be promoting understanding, and we are ready to associate with the nations of the world, large and small, to confer, to advise, to seek the true views of world opinion, to recommend a plan to bring about early disarmament and to divest ourselves of the crushing burden of military and naval organizations. We will help to suggest plans for mediation, conciliation and arbitration, and (Continued on page eight.)
"Teatro America" TODAY! DEBUT! DEBUT! : From the remarkable Spanish dancer : - tSpCISRZS lUCSl From the Casino of Buenos Aires. - Great Dances - Castanets - Luxurious Costumes. LUNETAS A 30 CTS. new program.
Tonight will take effect the inauguration of the Yaguez ■ As we told Jos readers 1 some time ago, tonight will be inaugurated this great theater, whose value amounts to 3100,000, and has a capacity for 1,200 persons. Don Francisco Maymón, a well-known businessman, is the owner of this great work of art, who, after numerous and almost invincible obstacles, has succeeded in providing Mayagüez with one of the best theaters in the Antilles. For the inauguration, the grandiose film in 6 acts "The Island of the Conquest", interpreted by No. ma Talmadge, whose creation led her to shine in the cinematographic sky as a star of first magnitude. We wish great triumphs to our friend Mr. Maymón in the new enterprise, in which he has demonstrated his courage and the great commercial knowledge that he possesses. A SHOT FROM Moca, Moca reports that Placido Cruz fired a revolver shot at Juan Plaza, wounding him in the right arm - PLACEMENT - We are looking for a young stenographer in English, who can give references and has some business experience - We will only consider applications from those who possess these qualities. Please apply to P.O. Box 1382, San Juan. 1
Distinguished travelers On the steamer "Manuel Calvo" returned yesterday morning to San Juan, after a long stay in Spain, our dear friend and companion Don Matias Real, who, both in this house of EL MUNDO and in the society of San Juan, has great and well-deserved affection for the goodness of his character and his exquisite culture. Matías Real returns in the company of his beautiful and gentle wife, with whom he married in the Canary Islands (Spain), after having visited the most picturesque towns of the Iberian Peninsula. We send to our dear colleague an affectionate greeting of welcome, which we extend to his distinguished wife, the President of the Senate of Puerto Rico. Notice is hereby given that this Committee will hold a public hearing in the Senate Committee Room on the eighth (8th) day of the month, at ten o'clock in the morning, for the purpose of hearing all persons who wish to present reports in favor of or in opposition to House Bill 1 "Regulating the tenancy agreement in Puerto Rico, and establishing certain rules concerning the eviction lawsuit. R. Cuevas ZEQUEIRA, Chairman, Advt/i
Congressional Commission to investigate the island Here is the resolution adopted by the Conference of Presidents and Officers of the National and International Unions, held in Washington on the 23rd and 24th of last month: "We sustain the petition of the workers of Puerto Rico in their desire that the Congress of the United States appoint a commission with authority to investigate the island. United States appoint a commission with authority to investigate the industrial conditions, as well as the general governmental affairs of the island, and especially those affecting the education, health, and welfare, economic and living questions of the multitudes of Puerto Rico, and also that the Constitution of the United States and the laws passed by Congress for the purpose of protecting the American workers of the Continent, be made applicable to the workers of Puerto Rico." - ¿ 8 CUERDAS DE GAÑA Informan de Yabucoa que un gran I incendio arrasó 8 cuerdas de caña, de ■ don José R. Roselló El hecho según informes, fué casual * Wanted: young man 21. UnI usual opportunity to learn busines. Must be good stenographer and typewriter in English and Spanish. Call tueeday 10 A. M. M. M. T. Stark, Inc. Cross 1.
WOODROW WILSON
MHI|Rj|MB ... E '-"H ,.(?>■'. -^--.'■'''.■> 4 1 1 "l,-> '' - -*/ f* ' ' ''■■Bk *'■■* s v 'i*.
UHima photograph of the glorious American paladin, who dejected, disillusioned, and in broken health left oe being , _ prqsUjfola of the United States. RMAfSOSPOSPECTED RATS FROM MAYAGUE AND QUEBRADILLAS THESE ANIMATES WERE IN A STATE 0[ PUTREEACOON WHEN EXAMINED.
SUSPICIOUS RATS IN MAYAGUEZ, QUEBRADILLAS AND x UTUADO The Biological Laboratory, in charge of Dr. Hernández, Dr. Giuliani, Dr. Morales and Dr. Carrión, examined yesterday 206 rats of different origins. The following suspects were found. 1, from the San Juan wall; 1, from the Puerta de Tierra crematorium; 2, from the mangrove swamp at stop 27; 1, Highway No. 229; 1, Cerra Street; 1, San José corner Tetuán; 1, "Condado" No. 40; 1, Campo Alegre. 40; 1, Campo Alegre; 1, Calle de la Cruz; 1, Highway No. 152; 1, in Ma yagiiez; 1, in Utuado, and another, in Que bradillas These last three, coming from the island and which have been declared suspicious, should not be taken into great consideration until proven positive in the final procedures, since all of them were in an advanced state of putrefaction when they were submitted for examination. NO MORE PLAGUE? For six days now, the Laboratory has not confirmed a positive plague case. Nevertheless, the public should not lose heart in its intense campaign against rats and the cleanliness of the city. rSEÑORA OPERADA Mrs. Ana Escobar, from Loiza, has been operated with great success, at the Miramar Clinic, by the notable surgeon Dr. Leandro Lopez de la Rosa. She was suffering from abdomen. It is one more triumph of the reputed doctor. She pleats and covers buttons. A CARAZO, Brau St 72.
The only thing on which absolute success depends. -Yesterday, Dr. Ortiz was informed of the existence of a suspicious case at the 6 12 stop. -The cases that are under observation of the Department in their own homes, are daily examined by the doctors of the same, without to date none showing symptoms of the epidemic. THE SEVEN RATS FOUND IN A CRAFT BOX OF COOKIES, at Pier No. 2, Gave NEGATIVE RESULT We are informed CURIOSITIES In the pantheon of Paris are buried Mirabeau, Voltaire, Lepeletion de Saint Fargeau, J. J. Rousseau, Marshal Lannes, Portalis, Oasanet, Vieu, Lagrange, Gougainville, Victor Hugo, Lazarus, Carnot, and Berthelot and his wife. The convention had the remains of Marat placed in the pantheon and those of Mirabeau removed; but in 1795 those of Mirabeau were placed again and those of -Marat were removed. ií I CHARGE IN SUGAR TO IOS COLOKOSJ CENTRAL :: I sell Trucks and Automobiles ' ' ' i > of the best mircas that are < > ! I import and I charge in sugar to , > ¡ ¡ ¡ good price. ' ¡ ¡ ¡ ¡I ANICETO PANIAGUA. P. O. Box 782. > > > San Juan, Pto. Rico. í
TRUE REALIZATION < OF SHOES AND CLOTHING MADE FOR AND ABALEEROS IN "LA CIUDAD CORRAL**; cruz a