ELWJNDO
H4"4**4 4 414 4 114 4 114 1 14 1 1 1 H > 10 pages 3 cents. Samestr", $4.00 Un tito,$7.50 4**4 ************1 mu t
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 ' Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345 ; la" Si "8" >8" A A A A A A A A A ¿♦AAA"'"/*""'-. - *- AA
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
AHO IH
-AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PablUbed and dirtrthatod ud" (So. sol) autnorued i b, ,h. *ei u> oewbar 6. 1"1T, un ai" el the Poet Office ef I .Sen Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the Preaidcnt, A. 8. Bar Jetón. Poetaaetor General. Bntorod m eeeond eUae ■atter febmary fil, Ifil", a" the Port Office at San Juan, Porto Ri do. United matea oí Aaeriea andar the Act of march ". HU J
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 1921.'
NUMBER 833
Don Luis Toro, president of the "P. R. Am. Tub. Ce." yesterday conferred extensively with Mr. Reily.
The conference held yesterday with Mr. Reily, president of the Porto Rican American Tobacco Company, lasted nearly two hours. As our readers know, Mr. Toro returned from the United States on Wednesday last; hence the importance of this interview was of extraordinary importance, since it was held almost immediately after his arrival. It is curious to note the fact that during the celebration of the aforementioned interview, among the many people who were waiting for their turn in the reception room of the Governor's office, was Mr. Iglesias, and it seems that when he was announced to the Governor, Mr. Toro learned of his presence there. When the interview was over, the Military Aide took his hat to Mr. Toro, and he left the Fortress through the private rooms, perhaps so as not to have to cross the reception room. Moments later, our editor was waiting for Mr. Toro at the Palace Hotel and with his proverbial courtesy, he gave him the honor of a brief interview. He began by telling us, when asked about the conference he had just held with the Governor, that it had had no other character than that of an interview of pure courtesy, since he had met the Governor in the United States and had been to greet him and exchange brief impressions with him about the economic situation of the country. -What do you think-we asked-about the socialist participation that the Governor has granted in forming the new Executive of the Island? Upon hearing this question, a smile appeared on Mr. Toro's lips, indicating perhaps that he knew our intentions, and he answered: - "He says he has done this for the good of the country; but I cannot, nor should I say anything about these things, first: because I have only been in the country for one day and I am not very well acquainted with TODAY - Gala Day. - TODAY FOR THE "Rialto" The sensational drama "El Diablo" 5 stars and it's "Selection". SAVIKO Just received ury large assortment of cashmere suits, latest novelty, *at very limited prices, and many other fine articles for gentlemen. San Francisco 52. San Juan. FOR ROOM RUGS See those of "EL CIELO" San Juan, Alien No. 25.
EXIJA BEER (WM IS ALWAYS BRANDED Porto Rico Brewing Co. SAN JUAN, PR.
Saturday Special 1007 Trajes eAlpaca y* Panama Beach \ =- a $6.98 ■ Strictly Cash. . P. SCHIRA & CO. S. en C. .
The second reason is that I do not want any statement on my part to be misinterpreted in such a way as to destroy the work I propose to do in harmony and harmony with the Government, as well as with all the different interests connected with the corporation I represent". Mr. Toro then told us about the financial situation in the United States, which he said was extremely critical, but which was already improving, although very slowly. -There is a tendency," he said, "to lower the cost of living, and to that effect almost all industries have agreed to lower the wage rate. Just now, a short time ago, on the occasion of the twelve per cent cut in the wages of railroad employees, a cut which was also made in the cost of freight and which was approved by the Shipping Board, and because the companies intended to cut ten per cent more, the workers were on the eve of going on general strike. This reduction in wages, as you will understand, is as logical as it is natural. If you want to reduce the cost of production, you have to reduce the cost of labor. ' ' - "And do you intend to follow the same practice here?" -Undoubtedly. We are still paying the same wages as at the time of the war, since that is what we offered in the contracts, but in the present situation there will be no choice but to reduce wages; of course they will never be reduced to the level they were at before the war; but a fair reduction will be made." -Did you indicate to the Governor anything of that purpose? -Yes, we exchanged impressions about it. -And what was his opinion? -No, I don't want to say anything at all about what the Governor and I talked about. And at the insistent reserve of the distinguished businessman, we opted not to bother him any further, bidding him farewell and thanking him infinitely for his extreme complaisance towards us. AN UNAPPLIED MARKET There is opportunity for the sale of all kinds of articles in the Virgin Islands. "SEND YOUR TRAVELING AGENTS The motor schooner "Mystery," which is a vessel of much safety will admit cargo and passage every week for St. Thomas and St. Croix. ANTILLES TRADING CO. Telephone 1042. Box 836. Advt.
MR. HERRICK GIVES BANQUET IN HONOR OF MARSHAL JOFFRE (By French Cable) PARIS, Nov. 4.-Mr. Myron T. Herrick, United States Ambassador at this capital, has given a grand banquet to Marshal Joffre, who will leave Marseilles on the eleventh of the present month, in order to undertake his announced voyage around the world. The banquet was attended by Baron Ishii, Minister of Japan, and M. Loucheur, Minister of the regions devastated by the war. ACCOUNTING BOOKS OF VARIOUS PRICES AND SIZES, SOLD BY PORTO RICO PAPER & SUPPLY CO.
POUO NOTICE TO OUR FRIENDS AND RELATIVES We are pleased to announce that due to the growing development of our business, which did not permit us to operate comfortably in the small premises we had hitherto occupied at Alien 70, we have moved our offices and Phonograph Department to the Sallaña Building. Alien 89, in front of the Municipal Theater, where we are pleased to offer our services. IMPORT SALES & BUSINESS AGENCY, INC.
YARN FABRICS! Arrived in the steamship "Leon XIII" the famous YARN CRETONS, CASTAÑE brand. "LA HIJA DE BORINQUEN" offers this opportunity to its supporters and friends. A. M. SOMOZA & Co.
A BRONZE PALM ON THE TOMB OF THE FAMOUS "UNKNOWN SOLDIER "* PARIS, November 4.-On the occasion of the Independence Day of Panama, the diplomatic representative of the said republic in this city, deposited a bronze palm on the grave of the "Unknown Soldier". A representative of M. Barthou thanked the Panamanian consul for his offering, who in his speech said that it should be interpreted as a homage dedicated by his country to the glory and sacrifice of the French Republic. Diego Agueros & Do. 60 ALLEN ST. 60 SELL GENERAL rubbers, the queens of Puerto Rico.
The reduction of armaments will be discussed first.
(FOB FRENCH CABLE) WASHINGTON, November 4.- According to the program drawn up by the American delegates to the disarmament conference, the first thing to be discussed, as soon as the conference officially opens, will be the problem of reducing armaments, followed by questions affecting the Far East. The United States will make the most strenuous efforts to ensure that the work which begins on the 12th will make such a favorable impression that it will be fruitful in practical results. GERMANS OBSTINATE NOT TO DESTROY MATERIAL BERLIN, November 4.- The correspondent of the French newspaper "Le Journal" highlights in an article the violent campaign that the German reactionary press is waging against the Inter-Allied Commission, which is obstinate, in compliance with the clauses of the Treaty of Versailles, in destroying large quantities of material that Germany has in reserve. 8E VOTES FOR ALLIANCE OF FRANCE, ENGLAND AND THE UNITED STATES LONDON, November 4. Harvey, United States Ambassador to this city, has delivered at the Liverpool "Chamber of Commerce" a speech in which he assured that, in the not distant day, England and France will enter into an alliance with the United States. Harvey further declared that the economic situation of the world at the present time is very disastrous and disastrous, and is causing more damage than that caused by the war itself; and that, in order to avoid it, the formation of such a great alliance is necessary. KING JORGE RECEIVES THE CUBAN DELEGATION LONDON, November 4.- The Cuban mission, presided over by ex-president Mario Menocal, arrived here today, received by the English monarch, who received them with great cordiality. LILA, November 4.--The work in the weaving mills in the Roubaix and Tourcoing regions has been interrupted, with no incidents to be regretted. Municipal Theater TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Second performance of the famous transformer and ventriloquist "Gran Fregolino" who last night drove the San Juan audience crazy with enthusiasm. Completely * - * new program. On Sunday, big matinee dedicated to the children's world.
"To the department of Sanidcd will not take the politics".
So assures Or. Halare! HEADS OF HEALTH DEPARTMENT VISIT THE GOVERNOR Yesterday, Dr. Lippit and Dr. Malaret, Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Health, respectively, visited the Governor. The purpose of the visit was to greet Mr. Reily and to inform him that they had already taken up their posts in the Department. Mr. Reily was very pleased to greet the aforementioned officials, to whom, according to our reports, he gave certain indications as to the line of conduct they should follow there. Dr. Malaret informed a REtv-xt TER of ours that it was not the intention of the new Sanitary Directorate to make great changes in the personnel of the Depratamento, since it was not in their mind to bring politics into the heart of that organism, whose work would be more efficient the more it was divorced from those strange infidences. Given the haste in which the doctor found himself, it was not possible for us to ask him several more questions that we had in our portfolio, which we will put to him as soon as the occasion arises. MRS. H0N0RE AND CUEVAS ZEQUEIRA REMAIN AT THEIR POSITIONS The Deputy Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Mr. Cuevas Zequeira, as well as the head of the Labor Department, Ledo. Honoré* eontinúañ in their respective positions. Commissioner Toro, held brief conferences with them, about his projects of administration in the Department and asked them to cooperate with him to the best success of the functions in their charge. We understand that so far there has been no change in this Department. IDr. Frias Injections are given with ampules of legitimate German Neosalvasiin at eight dollars each. Take advantage. Office: Telephone Building. Tanca esouina to Tetouan. From 11 to 12 and d." 3 to 5. Telephone 895.-Plating and lining buttons A. CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt.
Mr. Prudencio Rivera Martinez, will not accept the position of head of the Labor Bureau.
Yesterday morning we learned that the labor leader and general organizer of the tobacco workers, Mr. Prudencio Rivera Martinez, who was indicated by the Governor to occupy the position of head of the Labor Bureau, will not accept the post. Persons close to Mr. Rivera-Martinez informed us that his decision was due to his firm desire not to abandon his position as General Organizer of the Tobacco Growers, since he might be mortified by this labor element, which for so long had placed its trust in him as director of its unions and organizations. Confirming more tar de, we found the maximum leader of the socialist party in the Governor's office accompanied by Ledo. José Soto Rivera, whom he presented to the Governor as the ideal candidate to replace Mr. Rivera Martínez. It seems that the Governor accepted the change proposed by Mr. Iglesias and instructed him to communicate it to Mr. Toro Labarthe, commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, who is the one called upon to make the aforementioned appointment. José Soto Ri vera, appeared at the Hotel PaJace, in EL LCDO. CORDOVA DAVILA CAME TO SAN JUAN YESTERDAY TO ATTEND THE MEETING OF THE CENTRAL BOARD 1 Yesterday at noon we greeted at the Palace Hotel, Commissioner R-'idente Ledo. Córdova Dávila, with whom we had a long talk about political matters. The interview was confidential, as Ledo. Córdova Dávila told us that he had not yet exchanged impressions with the men of his party, and therefore did not consider it opportune to advance any comments. Mr. Córdova-Dávila had the purpose, and it was for that reason that he came to San Juan, to attend the meeting of the full Central Board, with the attendance of Senators and Representatives. I TRANSFER OF OFFICE AND WAREHOUSE We are pleased to inform you that we have moved our office and warehouse to 24 Tetuán Street, which we inform you of for your good knowledge and where we hope you will continue to favor us with your confidence. RICARDO DAVILA & CO. (INC.) Advt.
where he held a conference with Mr. Labarthe. He began by introducing Mr. Soto Rivera and informed him that Mr. Rivera Martinez had resigned the position of head of the Negociado del Trabaja, to which Mr. Toro replied that how could he resign if he had not been appointed yet. "No, but since they offered it to him", Mr. Iglesias answered, and added that in any case, Mr. Soto Rivera was now the candidate they were looking for, and referred to the interview they had held with the Governor. Mr. Toro, when asked by Mr. Iglesias about the program he planned to develop in relation to the workers' problems, answered that he was inspired by the best wishes and that he wanted his (Mr. Iglesias') support for this work. In the conversation "the name of Bolivar Ochart came up, and although we don't know for what purpose, it would not be far-fetched to affirm that he was a possible candidate for deputy chief of the Labor Bureau! On arriving here, Mr. Iglesias became aware of the presence of one of our editors and the three of them retired to a secluded part of the Hotel, where they could be free from the indiscretions, as typical as they are justified, of our profession. A CONTINENTAL HAS OFFERED HIS SERVICES TO MR. BARCELO Yesterday, a Continental, a great connoisseur *of the politics of the United States, of the West Indies, and especially of Puerto Rico, addressed a letter to the President of the Unionist Party, Mr. Barceló, in which he unconditionally offered him his services. Our informant, deserving of all credit, assured us that the letter was written in friendly terms V in which he emphasized the desire of this Continental to serve the cause of Don Antonio, in whom, according to our informant, he had found a worthy advocate for the support of all Unionists. PHOSPHOROS 'Three Stars' The legitimate matches have arrived. DO NOT ADMIT OTHERS. sues, from L Villamil & Co. representatives. BUY GARRO Two seats. Little use Any morca Write F. R., D. P.O. Box 1246. -"' ".,a zzz Genuine Guillet razors. $5 to $1.98. with 6 blades. AT "EL CIELO" No. 25 Alien St..
The Governor called to the Fortress yesterday Licdojiuinones.
Through Colonel Shanton was called yesterday to La Fortaleza the prosecutor of the District Court of Guayama, Ledo. Quiñones, who had a long conference with the Governor. The interview, according to details we later obtained, was conducted in very cordial terms. The Governor told Quiñones that he did not feel any prejudice towards him, and that if he had not included him in the past judicial combination it was mainly because the Attorney General, Mr. Mestre, had influenced the appointment of Ledo. Torres Córdova, from Ponce. Then Attorney Quiñones expressed to Mr. Reily that he had forgotten his motto, "to do justice to everyone", when it came to his person, since he had allowed himself to be guided by the accusations of Martínez Nadal, without giving him the opportunity to defend himself. Mr. Reily interrupted Mr. Quiñones telling him that he, during his term as Guayama's prosecutor, had played politics, without taking into account that Mr. Yager would be replaced by a real Governor. Mr. Quiñones defended himself from this accusation, stating that the Governor was not authorized to accuse him in this manner, since his decision to declare him guilty outside of the judicial combination came about because of the testimony given by only one of the parties. Mr. Reily added that Senator Mar Davila had defended him, and ended the interview by wishing Quiñones every success in the practice of the profession to which he intends to devote himself in San Juan, where he will also hold the position of Commissioner of the Federal Court. PARIS, November 4.-The French Academy received yesterday in solemn session M. Bedier, who will take the place of the glorious poet Edmundo Restand, recently deceased lieutenant. MR. PIETRANTONI IS CONGRATULATED The distinguished businessman Mr. R. M. Pietrantoni has received countless letters from the United States, congratulating him for his scientific and journalistic articles in favor of Industrialism in Puerto Rico, all of which, as announced to him, will be reproduced in American magazines. To these congratulations we also add our own. "Teatiojménca" A single tanda at 3 8:15 P. M. - TODAY - GRAN - EXITO - La Banda Revolucionaria Chistosísimo "JASS BAND" de "LOS HERMANOS SOLER" ■ Deluxe program tonight. < Tomorrow new program and premiere of * the movie ' "ANTE LA CRISIS" ' NOTE--Tomorrow Sunday, at 4 P. M-, Gran Matinée dedicated to the children's world by "LOS HERMANOS SOLER" Great season Ue joy.
French Steamer 'MACORIS" Expected at this port, bound for Corunna, Havre and Bordeaux, about the 17th or 19th of the present. She will admit passengers for Corunna and Havre and cargo for the three first mentioned ports and for those of Northern Europe. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT
"BEHN BROTHERS, Inc., Agts. Telephone Building. San Juan, P. R.
LUMBER BUILDERS I CAN SELL LUMBER CHEAPER THAN ANYONE ELSE ON THE MARKET. BRING YOUR ORDER AND YOU WILL BE CONVINCED. LARGE QUANTITIES OF ALL KINDS IN STOCK. F. Benitez Rexach, Dock No. 6.