ELM0NDO
- 10 pages 3 cents Semester, $4.00 ; One year,$7.50 AAAAJ. J_... jl,,,, ......... . .
-r -r t -S'T Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 * Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO |l|
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Mr. Barceló was not
fné cited to attend the conference
Last night, an Editor of this newspaper asked Mr. Barceló if he, as President of the Senate, had been summoned to attend the conference. Barceló if he, as President of the Senate, had been summoned to confer with the Governor on the question of judicial appointments and department heads, as other Senators had been, and he replied that he had not received any such summons. THE "QUO-WABANTO" OF THE SOCIALISTS OF FAJARDO Last week was filed in the District Court of Humacao, before Judge Berga, of said court, the petition for the announced ''Quo Warranto'' appeal of the Socialists of Fajardo, with the purpose of obtaining, through a ruling in their favor, to rescue for them the municipal government of Fajardo, a town they claim to have won in the last elections, this fact having been ratified by a decision of the Supreme Court. Since in recent days it was reported in the press that another District Judge was going to be sent to Humacao to hear the appeal filed by the Socialist Party to replace Mr. Berga, who seems to be a disliked member of the Socialist Party, we give the news of the filing of said appeal, so that you may see the falsity of the rumors that circulated for said reason. Judge Berga, as soon as the above mentioned petition was filed, ordered the notification of the parties and gave them a term of ten days to file the complaint. NATIONALISTS SEND CABLE TO PRESIDENT HARDING The San Juan Nationalists sent a cablegram yesterday to President Harding, Washington, D. C. "We strongly protest against the Reily administration. Politely suggest his immediate dismissal." Manuel Diez de ANDINO, President "Nationalist Association". THE SENATE GIVES A VOTE OF CONFIDENCE TO BBIAND _ PABIS, October 28.-The Senate has given a vote of confidence of 301 votes to nine, in favor of M. Briand. "Rialto" TODAY. Premiere in Puerto Rico. TODAYPauline Frederúk in the 5-act drama "Love is alive Flame" CURRENT PRICES Tomorrow Sunday , GRACE DARMOND in the 5-act drama "Love for Luxury" . CURRENT PRICES ">- FOR RENT Own premises for all kinds of business, the most central and the coolest of San Juan. Tetuán 28, corner to Tanca. Will inform: FREIRIA & CO.
i The United States
and Great Britain will march closely together
(From our correspondent in N. Y.) VIA ''ALL AMERICA CABLES" NEW YORK, Oct. 28.-In a speech delivered by English Admiral Beatty, on the occasion of a great banquet held in his honor at the Astoria Hotel, the illustrious seaman made important statements which are being vividly commented upon by the press. Beatty stated emphatically, referring to the present world situation, that the United States and Britain would march together in solving world problems and, if necessary, would fight together. NEW YORK, Oct. 28-A judging from the latest impressions of the railroad conflict, the belief prevails that the formidable stoppage announced will not take place. However, the authorities involved in the settlement of the conflict are prepared in anticipation of the conflict breaking out and reaching the severity predicted by the pessimistic elements. A GREAT POLITICIAN SERIOUSLY ILL WASHINGTON, Oct. 28.-The illustrious politician and Senator Falls is suffering from a serious illness. SENSIBLE DEATH Yesterday died in San Juan the distinguished Mrs. Carmen ¡sBprmúdezWiada "te TBrt-fWBf kindly who knew how to win the affection and distinction of all who treated her, for the noble virtues that her soul treasured. The deceased, whose death has been generally felt in this city, was part of a dignified family that enjoys a well-deserved esteem in the society of San Juan. Today at eleven o'clock in the morning will be the burial of so venerable lady, leaving the funeral procession, otile of San Justo number 3. We send our heartfelt condolences to the family of the deceased, and especially to her children and her sister, the esteemed Mrs. Maríi Bermúdez, for the legitimate grief that overwhelms them. Calderos, Anafres, y Hornillas VENDEN Villar Sanchez & Co. ISABEL 2a. No.' 14. San Juan. Diego Agueros & Co. 60 ALLEN ST. 60 SELL GENERAL rubbers, the queens of Puerto Rico.
For Trade ' Cretona 8 4 Peroune at 35 cents. Chinelas pajilla at $2.10 dozen. Cane umbrellas at $16.50 dozen. New military friezes at $5.00 one. Rodriguez Hnos. S. en C. Plaza Principal San Juan, P. R. Box 963. WOOD GENTLEMEN BUILDERS I CAN SELL CHEAPER WOOD THAN ANYONE ELSE IN PLAZA. BRING YOUR ORC DEN AND YOU WILL BE CONVINCED. LARGE QUANTITIES OF ALL KINDS IN STOCK. F. Benitez Rexach, Dock No. 6. ' .7 : ' '
| Published and dirtnbut*d nadar p "nut (No. eoi) "atnoniiM "*>- Ac" ol ueiotxr ".>"!"!?. 11* at tn* Port Oifleo rt I San Joan, Porte Rico. By ordar of tha Proa.danl a b Bur - -"■-"*..* Cniarao m "aoond elaaa matter, J fobruary 31, 1910, at the Post Offlce at Ban Juan, Porto Bt *o United Stataa -rf Amortes andar the Act of march 3, 18T0.
: Policy of partkloyplfflca of men.
By Licentiate I PEDRO CAPO RODRIGUEZ ''Quousque tándem, Catalina, abutére patientia nostra?" For anyone who is thoroughly acquainted with ' our politics and versed in the , historical oxigenes and primordial causes , which determined in the past and determine in lá ( minan en lá actualidad the existence of ! I our parties, it is clear as light , that those deep and lamentable divisions which today separate them in matters 1 of our ''status" and relations with , the United States, are more apparent and fictitious than real and effective. At bottom it can be said, in truth, that there is nothing in them but party politics, and more than party politics, something that relates to people, to individuals, to men. Before the Treaty of Paris was signed confirming the cession of our Island by Spain to the United States, stipulated in the Washington Protocol, even before the American troops had arrived on our shores as liberators and friends, and even before the serious events that provoked the Spanish-American war of eighteen hundred and ninety-eight, in which our fate was determined, our politicians had already introduced in our people those same divisions, which still disturb them. It is true that at that time other pretexts, other crutches, other fetishes were adduced as principles; but in the end the primordial causes were the same: the personal equation, the men! At that time it was said that our divisions were of "orthodoxy" and "heterodoxy"; that is to say, of pure autonomist principles whose realization was not defended by the old metropolis, and of principles of advanced politics, sustained by Muñoz and his supporters, of arriving at practical proximities with the Spanish parties, which would allow the Puerto Ricans, at least, to take turns in power with the old conservatives. This was not an obstacle, however, so that after the celebration of the sagas tino pact conceived and negotiated by Muñoz, the so-called "orthodox", led by Dr. Barbosa, came to the feast of jobs and public positions when the autonomy was implemented in Puer to Rico and the liberal party led by Muñoz Rivera came to power. And these divisions of a personal nature in our parties were already latent among us since eighteen hundred and ninety, scarcely three years after the formation of the autonomous party, which constitutes the most resolute and decisive gesture of the country up to that date under the inspiration of Cepeda and the initiatives of Baldorioty. Muñoz's ideas in the old autonomist party By the "America" For tomorrow, Sunday, cinema and varieties by the comedy company Vital-Aza, EspañaNieva, with the premiere of the funny comedy "LOS CAPRICHOS'' Also, premiere in Puerto Rico: "AMOR AVENTURERO" by Jewel Carmen. 35 and 25 cents lunetai The Soler brothers arrived. MALA Royal Dutch Royal Dutch Steamship "CALYPSO" will leave about November 2 for SANCHEZ and PTO. PLATA admitting, cargo. Sues, from L. Villamil & Go. AGENTS. Tel. 580. San Juan, P. R. ! ' '
They mark a new stage" in our politics; they are, so to speak, the abandonment of that school of idealized principles based on philosophical and moral lucubrations on which our politicians were inspired until then, and the initiation of another more practical and more sane political school, based mainly on the demands of the situation and on facts. Whatever may have been the justification of our politicians under the sovereignty of Spain before the step forward taken by Muñoz in our politics, there is no doubt that since then those who have persisted in the past and still persist today in orienting our politics towards purely idealistic ends, based on philosophical lucubrations and principles of law without taking into account the inevitable circumstances and situations of fact, have, in my opinion, not the slightest excuse to justify them. * The fact that our promoter fathers had been entrenched in their ideals does not excuse us from disregarding the realities of the facts. Dreamer and ideologue have their place in politics as in all orders of life; but the men of government, the statesmen, the party leaders, the ones who give a crientation to the politics and aspirations of a people, must not neglect the needs imposed on them by the circumstances and the facts of their development. To do otherwise is not to know how to lead. To push the people to the active pursuit of unrealizable and impossible ideals under adverse conditions is to call into question their capacity to understand the things of life, to create embarrassing and difficult situations for them in the present and to compromise their best interests for the future. It is well for a people to set the aim of its aspirations on high ideals, even if these, for the time being, seem unattainable or impossible to the men who, out of ignorance or lack of faith, push it to make a vain effort to attain them, not only without counting on probabilities of success, but without even having it prepared for the intelligent and profitable use of its realization, and without knowing beforehand its real consequences in his life in GOOD AND CHEAP FOOTWEAR AT "LA FAVORITA" For men. For ladies. For children. GREAT ASSORTMENT Our buyer returned from the United States with a magnificent and varied assortment of SHOES, which we propose to make at full SITUATION prices For little money, for less than is spent on FOOTWEAR of doubtful provenance, you can get superior class, (guaranteed) at "ii favorite" which will give you satisfactory results. J Before buying your Shoes and Stockings, see our prices, our classes and our selected MODELS Luxury, elegance and good taste, costs - NOTHING "LA FAVORITA" Fulfills the desires of the most intelligent buyer. José Lema & Co. Box 442, San Justo 31, Tel. 390. San Juan, P. R.
Rather than being regarded and cared for by the people as directors and leaders, they should be regarded as dangerous men from whom the community and the country must be defended, because these men, with their ignorance or bad faith, invite the people to follow the path of Ja perdition and ruin. It is not only by having lofty ideals that a people can be saved and built up; the inevitable realities of life call for other causes; the people have to pay attention to those of greater immediate need, to their prestige, to their well-being, to their happiness. And that is the mission of the politician, that is the mission of the statesman, that is the mission of the party leader. What Mr. Barceló said on a solemn occasion, before that group of congressmen who visited us some time ago, "Give us independence even if you starve us to death", was an imprudent and reprehensible theatrical political display. Mr. Barceló should not have said that, neither as a political leader, nor as a Puerto Rican. Mr. Barceló knew very well, or at least he should have known, and if he did, he should have kept it very much in mind, that the people of Puerto Rico could never sanction such a thing. How could Mr. Barceló see his country perish of hunger to achieve its independence? What independence, that of death? Did Mr. Barceló think that he was demonstrating patriotism with that? I believe that I demonstrated the opposite. It is conceivable that a people would prefer death, not of hunger, but of the cruelest physical tortures, rather than to live in a state of slavery and political abjection; but did Mr. Barceló think that our situation is so desperate that death of hunger would be preferable to continuing under the sovereignty of the United States in the form in which we find ourselves today? Experience, observation, what we are seeing every day, must have warned Mr. Barceló that far from saying a famous phrase, he was saying a maja dery; because hunger, eiíámbré séñor Barceló, is a terrible thing! I am sure that when he said this, Mr. Barceló did not think of his little children. And what would those congressmen say to themselves when they heard this affectation from Mr. Barceló? Perhaps they were surprised, perhaps they regretted it, perhaps they were sorry. I can assure Mr. Barceló that when I read it I blushed, and at the same time I felt an immense pity; I blushed for Mr. Barceló, I felt pity for the country. Rather than deceive the people with such rudeness, I would not hesitate, Mr. Barceló, to sacrifice my own personal ambitions and let other men, with a clearer vision of reality, take my place and guide the politics of my country towards practical ends. Much is heard today about Muñoz's policy, without understanding it. Muñoz had patriotic theatrical displays: but Muñoz's policy in such mo' mentos made a waiting time; that was ' when lio was oriented, when it was (Continued on page 8a.) 'Tres Estrellas' PHOSPHOROS The legitimate matches have arrived. DO NOT ADMIT OTHERS. sues, do L Villamil & Go. Representatives. i THE FAMOUS ■OCM HAS ARRIVED ... For sale in all souls. ;; ! I' cenes of supplies. For in ■ ' ;; general training contact ¡ ¡ :: B. Fernandez Hnos. Sucrs.i i i ;; Marina, San Joan, P. R. " Z ♦ "America" Repeats : by popular demand today "Amor Tropical" An opportunity for those who could not see it. I MATINEE AND EVENING '
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 29, 1921.
NUMBER 832.
It is likely that today
judicial combination is likely to be settled today.
During the whole of this week there has been talk with extraordinary insis tence, about the appointments of heads of Departments. Countless rumors have been circulating daily on this subject, but to date nothing certain has been said about the matter. Although it has been said that Messrs. Lippitt, Toro Labarthe and Benedicto have already been appointed to the Departments of Health, Agriculture and Labor and Treasury, and that these candidates could be appointed, we can assure you that up to now there is nothing definite on this important matter. For today, the Senators of those Districts which are affected by the judicial combination that has been prepared for the vacancies that will occur on the first day of next month have been summoned to the Porta leza. Yesterday, throughout the day, one could see in San Juan, a great number of people from the island who came to the capital with the purpose of finding out the truth of the situation. The Attorney General's office was visited by all of them, and Mr. Mestre, even though he has knowledge of the combination, kept absolute reserve, without anyone being able to learn the details of the judicial movement in perspective. In the same way as the senators of the Districts, the officials who are to be transferred or changed have also been summoned, and today morning at ten o'clock, in the office of the! Governor's office at ten o'clock today morning, the combination will be definitively settled. According to reports we have acquired, we can tell our readers that Judge López Acosta of Guayama will not be appointed for a new term; that on the other hand, District Attorney Quiñones, even though his term does not expire today, will be reappointed, and that to replace the outgoing District Judge, two Republican candidates are sounding, with probabilities: Mr. Sepúlveda, of Ponce, and Mr. Díaz Cintrón, of San Juan. VIOLENT CRASH OF RAILROADS IN N. YORK NEW YORK, October 28.-As a result of a tremendous collision between two railroads, which occurred in the vicinity of New York, there has been some misfortune. Owing to the violence of the collision, several passengers, including the postmaster, were thrown out of the cars, suffering serious contusions. Cine Puerto Rico' today - SATURDAY - TODAY Episodes 3 and 4 of the series LOS MILAGROS DE LA SELVA (THE MIRACLES OF THE JUNGLE) AND a comedy of cute? bathers that will surprise the public. DON'T MISS AND YOU WILL ENJOY IT VERY MUCH EYE Due to the impossibility of attending it, the "Shoe Shine Saloon" and cigar stand in San Francisco 46 is for sale. Information: Tel. 1084. Buttons plating and lining. A. CARAZO, Brau St 72.
I Requiem Mass i S Monday 31 of the present at 8 o'clock in the morning a mass will be celebrated in the Chapel of the Rev. P.P. Franciscans, for the eternal rest of the soul oe O Don Hilario Santos Perez i The family of the deceased and the mercantile Hilario Santos and Co., beg their friends to attend such a pious act.
The consecration of
Monsignor Caruana took place yesterday.
According to the news we have, the Most Reverend Jorge Caruana, Bishop of Puerto Rico, was consecrated in Rome yesterday, October 28. Upon receiving the fullness of the power of Holy Orders, it is with great pleasure that we congratulate the illustrious Prelate, the Diocese of Puerto Rico, and all the clergy of the Diocese and in particular the Most Reverend Apostolic Administrator. After the consecration, his lime will go to spend a few days in Malta, his native country, where his happy mother still lives. The bishop of that island is the maternal uncle of Monsignor Caruana, bearing the same surname. We extend to the illustrious Prelate our most sincere congratulations and we hope that he will soon be with us to the satisfaction of his parishioners. 120 ARREST PRACTICED IN THE CAPITAL OF HUNGARY (BY FRENCH CABLE) BUDAPEST, Oct. 28.-The number of persons arrested for compli ■ cation in the affair of the ex-emperor Car los, amounts to one hundred and twenty, among whom is Archduke Es- , teban Francis. NEW YORK AND ITS ENLIGHTENMENT. ... Among the many things that make New York, the city of great attractions, of great enterprises, of monstrous buildings, remarkable, there is one thing that cannot go unnoticed by the many visitors from all parts of the world, and that is its grandiose illumination. Those nights so bright that they dwarf the conceptions of Jules Verne, those filigree shapes of the beautiful city, always brimming with joy and lust for life, we find it almost impossible to believe that they are due only to a kind of light bulb that has solved the problem of economy and efficiency, in the splendor of the artistic and the beautiful. Also the inhabitants of the "Enchanted City" have the right to enjoy the beautiful, if they decide to use, in the manner of the New Yorkers, the blue and white "Alpha" Concentrated Filament bulbs, sold by our friends "Rivero Chaves and Co.", in front of the Municipality, in this city. I ? X I Gas Masks | Asphyxiating " Souvenirs of the War. -- " Send orders to " í' HERBERT W. BROWN '' t Comercio 11, San Juan, f X * Puerto Rico. 4 AN UNAPPLIED MARKET There is opportunity for the sale of all kinds of articles in the Virgin Islands. SEND YOUR TRAVELING AGENTS The motor schooner "Mystery," which is a very safe vessel will admit cargo and passage every week for St. Thomas and St. Croix. ANTILLES TRADING CO. Telephone 1042. Box 836.