ELWNDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. semdstre, $4.00 One year, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
| SATURDAY, JANUARY 15, 1921. NUMBER 589.
YEAR III SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO | ||
DETAILS OF THE ARRIVAL OF GENERAL CROWDER
NOTHING IS KNOWN ABOUT THE INTERVIEW HELD WITH PRESIDENT MENOCAL IN THE PALACE WILSON'S ENVOY WAS VERY RESTRICTIVE" CROWDER, DISEMBARKED IN GREAT UNIFORM, AND TOLD REPORTERS NO NEWS HAVANA, January 6.- Major General Enoch Crowder, was received today by General Menocal, in the new presidential palace located in the Prado. The situation in Havana is the worst, having celebrated the customary concert in the crowded promenade of El Malecon, without any symptom of popular unrest. What could have happened between the two high personages is a mystery, having left the conference the envoy of President Wilson, with a magnificent cigar between his lips and a slight flicker of sight, caused, undoubtedly, by the intense reverberation of the tropical sun. When questioned by the American correspondents, he said: "When I have something to tell you, I will let you know. I am staying at the ' 'Minnesota." (Continued on page 3. >
¡ euüliBüed and distributed under permit (bu. aul) anthplizel by the Act of October 6, IV17, on file et the Poet Office of San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the Preaident. A SiiBur leson, Postmaster General. Entered aa second clast matter, 1 f ah ye arr- |1. 1,919. th j Post Office at San Juan. Porwj Rico, United States of underthe Actof march ", 1879.
In the U.S. there are now some 2,325,000 laborers suffering the horrors of starvation.
According to statistics published in the official organ of the League for carrying out the "Plumb" plan, that is to say in the labor newspaper "Labor", by Mr. Clint C. Houston, the number of workers without work in the United States amounts to 2,325,000 and has no comparison but that which was recorded at the time of the famous financial panic of 1907. This dreadful number breaks down as follows:
Building industry, 300,000. automobiles, 250,000. textiles, 225,000. clothing, 150,000. railroads, 200,000. iron and steel, 150,000. shipping, 125,000. amusements, 75,000 food products, 100,000. mining industry, 50,000. shipyards, 50,000. elastic rubber, 50,000. shoes and leathers, 50,000. printing, 50,000. accidental labor, 50,000. from Toledo (Ohio) they report being there.
The "Tiger of the Andes" General Cipriano Castro, wanted to invade Venezuela.
In a Havana newspaper we read the following: "There was a time when General ¡ Castro became famous in Havana. I He was put in solfa in a zarzuela of Alhambra, and the boys of the sidewalk hung kilometer-long tails from his coat. Today, the ex-dictator of Venezuela is once again a prominent figure. He arrived a few weeks ago in Santiago de Cuba. There he launched some declarations, formidable clones against the Americans, and disappeared. He vanished like Mr. Steinhart's hundred thousand pesos or the ase sino of Miramar. It was possible to find out that the diminutive and ferocious tyrant of the homeland of Bolivar had been in Matanzas, for hours or days, - it was not possible to find out with exactitude, - but his pistá was lost again. The police finally found general Castro, put in a room of a hotel,' as in a dungeon, condemned by its will to a tricta closure, between bolts of medicines that lie -- liaban tx room of emanations me TfteJiaviZ - "" General Castro's acfitud not de.¡ ja of being suspicious. The man who attracted the world's attention with his defiance of the nations of Europe and with his diseased kidney, which he toured the clinics of Germany and France, lived quietly in Puerto Rico. Like a king in the desert, the man who filled his country with mourning, lived quietly, watering the flowers in his garden and caring for his rose bushes with the affection of an old priest in love with nature. After the failed attempt of many years ago, the "Cabito", as he was called in Venezuela by the cohort of sycophants, to flatter his vanity of Napoleon tropicl, seemed no longer to think about the reconquest of power. His trip to Ouba and his mysterious dis-, of tropical Napoleon, seemed, not his traces, in a man so amicq d.e TO THE TRADE Cane Umbrellas Ask for prices to RODRIGUEZ HNOS. Cruz 8 - San Juan.
We were on the lookout for news of what prompted the former president of Venezuela to leave his fine Puerto Rican retreat to come to Cuba. General Castro affirms that his trip has only one purpose: to settle certain financial matters, but it seems that this is not the truth. A gentleman from Curacao, an island off the coast of Venezuela, which is an eternal focus of revolutions against the governments of the Liberator's homeland, assured us that it would be difficult for Citizen Castro to justify the financial interests that have forced him to make the trip that has aroused so many comments The same informant, a businessman very knowledgeable about the Venezuelan colony residing in Cuba, said that there is unusual activity among Castro's compatriots. Mr. Bivas Vazquez, who was a minister in Castro's government, seems to have had long conferences with his former boss; and movements have been noted among the elements loyal to General "Mocho" Hernandez, eternal aspirant to the presidency of his country. It seems that General Castro will be picked up at a point on our coast by a schooner that will take him to his country. It is confirmed, therefore, our first information, in which we referred to a mysterious schooner, to general Castro and to the coasts of Matanzas. It makes us of two years that a Mexican general tried the same adventure. He embarked on a schooner which went to the coast of Mexico, and there left him with his companions and a small car. (Continued on 1* page 3) TODAY- Premiere in Puerto Rico - TODAY " JANE NOVAK Hobart Bosworth'' in the tragedy in 6 acts, BEHIND THE DOOR NOTE: -The Company will return the di. The Company will return the money to anyone who proves that he has seen a more tragic and sentimental drama than this one. CURRENT PRICES
ALTHOUGH THEY TRY BY ALL LAWFUL MEANS TO FIND EMPLOYMENT, THEY ARE UNABLE TO DO SO, DUE TO THE SCARCITY OF WORK AND THE VERY ACUTE SITUATION, TO THE EXTENT THAT THEY ARE UNABLE TO FIND WORK.
The situation is very acute, to the point that the Mayor of the city has urged the Chamber of Commerce to take the necessary measures to solve the labor crisis, in order to provide relief to the hungry, whose situation could not be more critical, since all available charitable resources have been exhausted. The Mayor, Shreiber, stated that there were at least 25,000 idle workers in the city. 1 In Boston, likewise, the situation is of the utmost gravity, Superintendent G. Harry having stated, that those demanding work have been more numerous during the month just expired, than in any other month of previous years, from six years to the present. In Niles, Ohio, the large Hubbard Pressed Steel plant has closed its doors, leaving 1,000 workers in the industry out of work. | The famous Goodyear Company has announced wage reductions at its headquarters in Akron, Ohio, which so far will not affect the California branches of that important industry, and in Fitzgerald, Georgia, the Atlanta Binning-Ham, Atlantic Railroad has announced a 20 per cent cut in wages. ham, Atlantic Railroad, has announced that it will implement wage reductions equal to 50 per cent of all raises granted to its employees since 1917. I On the other hand, in Atlanta (Georgia), an increase of 2 cent per hour has been granted to all workers and employees of the Georgia Rail, Way and Power Company. Yesterday the trial of Ramon Drevon against the Porto Rican American Tobacco Co. was heard in Federal Court. | At the request of both parties, the case was adjourned on the 14th of last month. i I I 1 According to the complaint, Drevón was wounded in a melee by Eugenio Santiago, foreman of this company, in Bayamón. Santiago shot Drevón, wounding him in the right lung.
liLNAVf NTE VEN- í . DIM A PTO. RICO
We read in the important newspaper 'A B C", of Madrid: ' Iris and Juanito Palmer have had the happy initiative of taking Jacinto Benaver.te, at the head of the com pailia of the "Español", to tour Cu. ba, Puerto Bico and Mexico. -The contract is already a fact, and the artists of the 'Español', together with the illustrious playwright, will embark next September. The news has been so enthusiastically received in those countries, that at its mere announcement the publishers and booksellers of Havana have requested - says "El Diario de la Fariña" - to send them the first consignment of fifty collections of Recávente's theater, which amount to 1,350 copies, since 27 volumes have been published; 1,50$ copies of other plays of his, g 20 collections of non-dramatic works* * j From New York they have also made I - important order; of "Letters from Women" alone, <1,000 copies. It is already -hera da that the great Spanish aurors have outside Spain the bookstore success that their works deserve." trien empeñauiien I CASAUSECON LA ' HIJA DE HR. WILSON
j Repeatedly we had seen, at the door of the Fóftaleza, the wild and nervous figure of that subject, struggling to cross the thresholds, despite the continuous recommendations of the guard who guarded the building. The man, almost always, with a book in his hands. Apparently he was reading... j -Who is ' this!", -we had asked .... l I -A madman...,! -We were resentfully asked .... And as madmen sometimes have such strange things that they seem to be sane, we never bothered to "see" the "case" in detail. "It will be one of the ■ Cantes who come to complain against someone, because they claim to be his victim", we thought. For today the persecutory mania, as well as the delirium of ¡greatness, run rampant in those worlds that God has created for the grazing of all our passions. Yesterday we were convinced. We were very sorry, ' at first .... When we contemplated the matter with the eyes of our feelings.... Then, before the "subject's" reactionary demonstrations... And ! we think we even smile. We have already said it: "the madmen see things that seem to be sane".... You will see... Our man went up to the Chamber's offices... He looked around with ashamed eyes. .... God knows how much pressure the many paintings hung on the wall.
Sensational interview of the King of Spain with four presidents of South America.
THE SENSATIONAL INTERVIEW WILL TAKE PLACE IN AUGUST IN BUENOS AIRES, AND IT IS ASSURED THAT EVERYTHING IS READY TO RECEIVE THE KING.
BUENOS AIRES, January 4.- In the political and diplomatic circles of this capital, as well as in the most important social and journalistic centers, it is believed, by virtue of the latest information coming from Madrid, that the projected trip of King Alfonso XIH to South America will take place * at the end of next August. The news, as is well known, had already been published and confirmed by the organs of the press of this capital for several weeks, and what at this moment has come to give it even greater importance, if possible, is the fact that the visit of King Alfonso to Buenos Aires, will coincide with the presence in this capital, on the date indicated, of the President of Chile, Mr. Arturo Alessandri, of the President of Uruguay, Dr. Baltasar Brum, of the President of Brazil, Dr. Epitasio Pessoa. The reception ceremonies for these illustrious guests will be hosted by the President of Argentina, Dr. Hipólito Irigoyen. The Spanish sovereign and the presidents of four South American republics will meet here on this occasion. It is po I tes of the wall would cause in that tortured cere bro I.... -What do you want," they asked him. He began to speak. He was interrupted. -His name? l -Juan. Carmelo Reyes, a native of Co tozal, gentleman, to serve you. .... As the madman said this, he alternately raised and raised his head, as if looking on the floor, on the wall, for something that he had long since lost. Well, I wish a little .... For days I have been trying to see the governor. But the policeman at the entrance let me pass. And you should know that the purpose of my visit is very important.... I want to propose to Mr. Yager my marriage to President Wilson's daughter. ..... To propose this 'inspiration' to the Governor, I need someone to introduce me, and I come to request that one of you accompany me. If he accepts, fine. If not, all the same," concluded the madman, fixing his eyes on the ground. .... Our first idea flashed back into our minds. "This madman has a sane face;" with the only difference, as we see, that if he were indulged, he would be cured; whereas the "other," dea. pués que se mete algo entre ceja y -. eja, ni si le "fajen¡...." THE CRAZY GOD.
It is unlikely that the President of Paraguay, Dr. Manuel Gondra, will also be invited to attend this great meeting, given his proximity to this capital and the ease of travel. The meeting, possibly, will have no official character whatsoever, and will be considered as a mere coincidence; but this will in no way diminish its positive importance, nor will it prevent the great Ibero-American family from establishing itself there. It seems, according to assurances in well-informed circles, that the foreign ministries have had nothing to do with the matter, and that the question has arisen spontaneously, almost by itself, which shows that it has the sympathies of the peoples and that it is destined to produce excellent results. Perhaps they have wanted to take advantage of the trip of the sovereign to celebrate a beautiful party of fraternity between Spain and the South American countries, something that undoubtedly will contribute to maintain Don Alfonso in his purpose of undertaking that tour since it is predicted to have such a splendid future.
The prohibitionists have asked for one hundred million but have not been able to get five.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) WASHINGTON, Jan. 14-Senator Knox has accepted the directions of Mr. Harding, who asked that the ceremonies for taking possession of the Presidency be held on the portico of the Capitol, where he will be accompanied by Mr. Wilson, on the 14th day of March next. i -The House rejected the request of Mr. Galivan, who asked that one hundred millions be appropriated to strengthen the Prohibition law. The War Department has ordered the army of occupation in Germany to be reduced from 15,000 to 8,000 men. The final withdrawal of the entire army of occupation, says Mr. Baker, will soon be discussed. The support of the 15,000 men will cost $75,000 per day, to be paid by Germany. PARIS - Mr. Clemenceau has shown that he is more vigorous than ever. He has endured a rough tiger hunt without fatigue in Hindustan. The King of Gwalior has invited him. ATHENS. -Venizelos will not return to Greece even if the King calls him, according to the editor of "Patris". The most certain thing is that he will retire from public life, for his work belongs to Fame. PARIS. -The French government declares that the French torpedo boat "Sakalave", on surveillance in the Black Sea, destroyed an armed vessel "Bolaheviki". The Red soldiers fled from the transport, which sank. A contra.torpedo boat 'bol , sheviki" was reduced to impotence , There have been no casualties. Antonio Moreno the King of sympathy in the series The Precipices of Hate "TODAY" SATURDAY "H0Y ,V Cine Tres Banderas A thrill with this sensational series. To laugh out loud with the famous comedies dfi LARRY SEMON (Agapito) that accompany each program. It plies and covers buttons. Á CARAZO, Brau St 72. Advt. i
| MADRID.-The Spanish government wants to discuss with Trancia the possibility of making changes in the postaos tariffs VTENA. -The Austrian government annua ia that it will apply for credits, dírectly. from the United States. STOCKHOLM-Sweden government has prohibited, for the time being, the importation of coffee, in its purpose of increasing customs revenue. PARIS. -Francisco de la Barra, former resident of Mexico, has been appointed to preside over the Greek-Bulgarian arbitration tribunal which is to meet in Paris. -The President of the Republic continues to hold conferences with the po'ític je "cs, but without ha Ver legrado coi swearing the crisis. He continues to assert that the future government will be presided over by 1 Mr. Poincare, Mr Raóul Peret or Mr. ■ -Tiviani. . ine j. i'"-T UNIVERSAL presents Sunday at the RIALTO the famous actor FRAKK MAYO in the drama in 5 acts, ¡ Abismo Conyugal Matinal y Noche CURRENT PRICES Three salesmen with expe rience in the sale of Cash Registers, are solicited to sell Caja Registradora.Má quina de Sumar "American". Please write to Rivero Chaves and Co, San Juan. Advt. f GASOLINE | superior quality brand "MOTORINE" i Prices without competition. i I STUBBE Inc. i TANCA 9-SAN JUAN, P R. |
-=The Buick automobile, which has achieved such fame and popularity throughout the world for its excellent qualities, comes this year with improvements of such high significance that they place it at the forefront among all cars of its type for use in this country. The reputation that the Buick car has so deservedly earned is something that is not acquired by the smoke of straws. It is the prize awarded to a product that has been subjected to grueling tests over long years. Soon its favored owners will be able to achieve the joy of owning a Buick car, for we expect a shipment in a few days. However, since the cars we receive are never enough to meet the demand, we wish to advise those who wish to obtain a Buick to place their order now, so that their hopes will not be disappointed when they arrive at the dock, as is always the case, that they will all be sold out. To those who have not decided to order a Buick car in the hope that the prices of these cars will be reduced, we wish to point out that the manufacturers do not at present intend to make any rebate, but if this is done between now and April 1, we will give a rebate to any person who has purchased a car. * We offer this guarantee to our favorers with the authority of the factory to that effect. SANTIAGO A PANZARDI, INC. San Juan AUTOMOBILES Arecibo Ponce - Guayama
a irm // A A 88 The best cinema-The coolest-The most popular-The one of greater comfort-Today,'Saturday, true acon-tecinhipato with cinema and Debut DÉbut I tudiGL A I A |UI gi If A - Debut of the famous tranaformista, ventriloquist, eccentric, imitator, musical, duetista, that will be the admiration ffel public. " Tp./o I 1 AA Iwui elV I W. w MTWTT Prices that do not admit of competition-Lunettes, seniors, 30 cents-Lunettes, children, 20 cents - - - - MAIMF - "F w* M I [y| I I J I * ■■ Amphitheaters, seniors, 50 cents-children, amphitheaters 30 cents-Six-seat seats $2.50. Also to be shown will be the drama "FLOWER OF PASSION" per BESSIE BARRISCA I E.
DN GREAT ACTOR OF ' CINEMA HAS ARRIVED IN PUERTO RICO.
On the steamer "San Juan" arrived from New York the famous film actor Mr. Huntly Gordon, cor. object of taking part in the first production being prepared by the "Porto Rico Photoplay Co." Mr. Gordon will appear as lead actor and will play an important part in the film. Coinciding with the arrival in Puerto Rico of this notable film actor, the "Rialto" will show next Tuesday the interesting film "El lazo in visible", in which Mr. Huntly Gordon and Mrs. Vernon Castle are in charge of the film. The Invisible Lasso" will be shown in the afternoon and evening runs at no charge, and after each run Mr. Gordon will be introduced and addressed by an interpreter to the audience of the Rialto. EL MUNDO is pleased to greet the magnificent actor Mr. Huntley Gordoji, one of the fortunate interpreters of the cinematographic art, and "responding'' to the courteous visit he paid us yesterday in the company of his gentlemanly friend Mr. Bruno, wishes him new success on this island RENUNCIATIONS ACCEPTED The Governor accepted the resignations presented by the marshal of Mayagüez, Antonio Olivencia, and those of Luis Vadi and W. Ortiz, judges of Agua da and Maunabo, respectively.