THE WORLD
8 pages 3 ctvs, Semester, $4.00 A year, $.7.50
Offices; I Salvador Brau, 81 Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Published and distributed under permit (No. 801) enthorired by the Act of oetober C. 1017 on flle "t the pZTTOffleFTf 8an Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. 8 Bur leso? Po.tm "st "r Genere) Entered es second elaaa matter, fehmarv 21. 1019. at the Poet Office at Ban Joan Por"" W so. United States of Atn-riea under the Aet of march 8
SATURDAY, AUGUST 20, 1921.
NUMBER 773.
ANNUAL III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
The poet and the pumpkin answer.
An editor of "El Tiempo", in yesterday's editorial, tells me that I am a pumpkin in politics; that I am a good poet, but that I have no political vision. It pains me not to be able to answer him in the same words,' without being unjust, because the article is really very well written and reveals, in its author, that he is not a pumpkin at all and that he has a very sharp political vision. The Unionist party, in these moments, is a brave bull, to which a banderillero "Mont Reily" has nailed a pair of banderillas that have inflamed it and have put it in magnificent conditions for the final luck of the sword. The sword is the Republican party that is already in the ring hallucinating the bull with the red rag of independence. Almost blind, the bull is going to throw himself on the rag; the bullfighter is already pointing his sword; the ovation will be indes eriptible. But at the supreme moment, a capeador, who is no friend of the sword, makes a movement that distracts the bull elsewhere. The luck could not be. And then the sword, facing the capeador, says to him:- "what a pumpkin you are".... And the capeador grumbles to himself: "How clever this guy is; I thought he wouldn't notice my maneuver. In the same way, Mr. Editor of "El Tiempo", when you told me yesterday that I was a pumpkin, you said to me: "how clever this guy is"..... ■ There is a big difference, Mr. editor, between the program of "Olympus" and the program of the plebiscite that I have thrown to the study of my unionist compatriots. What the "Olympus" assembly resolved to do was to call for self-government in any form (State, Home Rule or Independence), leaving to the American people the choice of the formula. Such a program, as far as we were concerned, had the defect of ceding to a foreign power the decision of our future; and, as far as the Americans were concerned, it had the defect of including the word "Independence", which they believed to be prejudicial to their international relations. The program of the plebiscite is quite different. It is not to go backward, as you say, but to march forward. It is a program so simple that it can be summed up in these words: - "The Union of Puerto Rico will work for the broadest reform of the Constitution. REILY DOES NOT OPPOSE Unionists, Republicans, In dependentistas or Socialists using the fa mosa GOMA SOLIDA GRIS FISK for trucks. We have just received a complete supply of this type of rubber. I am requesting the new price lists. ■ THE FISK TIRE STORE " ADRIAN NELSON Distributor SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO. Advt
tual autonomous regime and will request of the United States that, when it is judged opportune to define our "status," it be done by means of a plebiscite or popular vote of the Puerto Rican people." Such a platform is more patriotic than that of "Olympus," because it places our destiny in our own hands; and it is more diplomatic, because without naming the ideal that may suit us in the future, it secures it by making it depend on our will. And it is, moreover, the most just and democratic formula, because the opinion of the majority is the one that must prevail at all times. Under this banner of the plebiscite, the pro-independence will think that the triumph will be of his ideal. And the same belief will have the supporters of the State and of the Autonomy. And this is why you do not like the program, Mr. editor of "El Tiempo", because you are not at all a pumpkin and you are a very smart guy, as I said before, and your sharp political vision makes you think that this is a much wider tarray than that of "Olympus" to catch fish of all colors and sizes. But it will never be the idea of catching fish that can move us to adopt this formula, but the patriotic yearning to unite and bring Puerto Ricans closer together. The same patriotic eagerness that prompted the distinguished Hostos to come to Puerto Rico to recommend that formula to us as a result of the change of sovereignty. The same patriotic eagerness with which Matienzo advised it, in brilliant articles in "La Correspondencia", when the first friction arose due to the word "independence". And I believe that Mu ñoz and De Diego also gave it their most decided approval. The idea, in brief, is not new. It is a seed thrown into the furrow by those masters and which has finally germinated in the popular conscience. Unionists and Republicans, from both sides of the island, we have heard them express these sentiments. For my part, I confess that, although I am an independentist, I would feel satisfied to see Puerto Bico as a State of the American Union, if it were by the decision of the Puerto Rican people. And I am sure that you Republicans, whom I judge to be Puerto Rican patriots, would fly the flag of the State with more love and pride, if you were to achieve it, not by an act of the American Congress, but by a plebiscite of the Puerto Rican people. Luis LLORENS TORRES. Cine Luna Today matinee and evening, inauguration of our social Saturdays with the gxan series "MALA SOMBRA" and the comedy in 5 acts, "Los Reformistas" by May Alison.
RIALTO and TRES BANDERAS SU PREMIERE WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 24 Tex Rickard presents the SENSATIONAL OFFICIAL film of the DEMPSEY vs. CARPENTIER 5-act boxing championship. Taken at ringside on July 2,-Price of admission $ 1 .OO Luneta.
LODGE TO BE PART OF AMERICAN DELEGATION (BY FRENCH CABLE) WASHINGTON, Aug. 19.-Senator Lodge, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has been appointed by President Harding, a member of the American delegation. HAITIANS WISH THE OCCUPATION TO CONTINUE WASHINGTON, Aug. 19-General Lejeune presented to the Senate Committee the investigation made in Haiti and Santo Domingo during the occupation of the aforesaid Republics by the American troops. The report states that the infantry has done everything in its power to help the inhabitants of Haiti and Santo Domingo and that the Haitians wish the occupation to continue. INTERESTING New Workshop and Garage IN SAN JUAN. Altos Edificio de las Monjas. OWNER: GARRABRANDT Solved the problem for those who drive their cars. For twenty dollars a month it is repaired, cleaned and greased (repairs for accidents apart.) Tel. 990. Building las MONJAS. Ask Mr. Garrabrandt ABSOLUTE GUARANTEE Spanish Grape Juice BRAND: "MOSTELLE" Substitutes admirably for * Moscatel. Boxes of 12 bottles and 24 half bottles. Sold by: SUCS. DE L. VILLAMIL & CO. San Juan, P. R.
the GOVERNOR POSTPONES HIS TRIP Don R. Siaca Pacheco, executive secretary, informs us as follows: "In compliance with the Governor's instructions, I have the honor to inform you that, due to important official matters which will occupy his time during the coming week, the Governor is regretfully obliged to postpone for a short time the official trip to the island which he had announced. THE LAST SIMULTANEOUS OF JANOWSKI Tonight will be held at the Athenaeum the last simultaneous of the celebrated chess player David Janowski. Fireworks are invited for this event!!!! j The popular actress Constance Talmadge in her best production "Good References" Tomorrow Sunday GRACE DARMOND in the beautiful photodrama "the Harinosa Juiado a" Precios Corrientes ART OF NECROPOLIS Tombstones and Pantheons From September 1 no" we will install in Tetuán Street No 1, opposite "Palace Hotel", where Mr. O- Bartoli Pioneer,- of sculptural art and MASTER of the VENEZIAN TERRAZZO was before and will return. C. BOSCHETTI & Co. plating and lining buttons. A CARAZO, Bran St. 72.
THE SPANISH HAVE COMMENCED THE OFFENSIVE IN MOROCCO (BY FRENCH CABLE) MADRID, August 19.-The Spanish forces have undertaken an offensive against the Moors, led by General Sanjurjo and Colonel Riquelme, under the command in chief of Colonel Cavalcanti. The Spaniards occupied the entire front of the port of Melilla. The battle was fierce. The gunboat "Lauria" fired on the Moors, causing a great number of dead and wounded. The Spaniards captured a large number of prisoners and wounded. The rebel tribes left an incalculable quantity of ammunition in the hands of the Spaniards. The copabates fought were hand to hand. Although the total losses are not known, on the part of the Moors are known to be enormous. Theater "America" Today Saturday great debut Cinema and Variety at 35 cents. Premiere in Puerto Rico of the drama "CIEGA JUVENTUD" Also debut of the company of Acrobats and Variety "TROUPPE MARX" Popular Songs-Acrobats- Clowns-Force-Trapeteers Duetto Bufos -Monologues-Dialogues- Tomorrow Sunday afternoon great Matinee Variety -Final "EL PACTO DE TRES" and "VIVO O MUERTO" by Jack Dempsey Evening Variety and Premiere "LA MANCHA DE SU HONRA" -See our daily Programs- PAPAS ESPAÑOLAS ¡ISLEÑAS LAS MAS SABROSAS | LAS MAS SABROSAS LAS MAS SABROSAS | Y TIERNAS, IN 70 POUND BOXES. They sell them cheap. Suos, from L. Villamil & Go. MARINA ; SAN JUAN, P. R.
The prosecutor Quiñones and undercover chief Mr. McClure have been instructed to go to Patillas for the purpose of making an investigation in connection with the judge of that town. CAPTAIN HURTADO: Yesterday the police captain, Don Miguel Hurtado, conferred extensively with the Governor. According to reports, Mr. Reily urged him to strictly enforce the law, since the general welfare and tranquility depended on it. THE REPUBLICANS AT THE FORTATALEZA: Yesterday the Mayor of Ponce, Mr. Parra Capó, visited the Governor, accompanied by the Republican leaders, Felin and Todd. Mr. Parra Capo conferred at length with Mr. Reily, to whom he sent his effusive greetings. TELEGRAMS TO THE ISLAND: . Cor. reason for the suspension of the Governor's trip to the island, telegrams have been sent to all the towns, stating that the excursion has been postponed until further notice. ANOTHER INVESTIGATION Mr. McClure has returned from the island, and, we are told, brings back reports concerning a District Judge, which, if true, are of the utmost gravity. -Great precautions are being taken in this case, as it involves the honorability of a distinguished family, and it may well be that it is the work of some unscrupulous and passionate person. THE YAUCO JUDGE HAS TELEGRAPHED TO THE "ATTORNEY" The * ' ' Attorney ' ' ' has received telegrams from the Yauco judge, in which he states that he is innocent of the charges against him, and requesting, therefore, to be heard by the Governor, The Governor reportedly told Mr. Mestre that he did not want to know anything about the matter, which he wanted to end. THE FAJARDO FIGHT Yesterday afternoon a Fajardo Commission visited the Governor with the purpose of informing him extensively about the Fajardo electoral lawsuit. The Commission stated that the Unionists were reluctant to hand over the reins of municipal power there, in spite of the triumph of the Socialists. The Commission made a history of the legal procedures put into practice to force the Unionists to hand over the posts, and left in Mr. Fajardo's hands the case of the Judge of Patillas.
The case of the Patillas Judge
Reily all the documentation relating to the lawsuit, which the Governor offered to study carefully. i THE SOCIALIST PARTY WOULD NOT CHANGE ITS PRINCIPLES ONE iota",-DECLAIMS IGLESIAS Faced with the political situation the country is going through- Iglesias, the maximum leader of Socialism in the island, told us yesterday- the Socialist Party does not have to change its fundamental principles one iota, tending to improve the living conditions of the home, the workshop and the countryside, as well as those of the working masses in the island. of the working masses in the present and to the aspiration of their more complete and secure economic, political and educational liberation for the future. "When you see the neighbor's beards...." I -¿ ? -We," says Iglesias, "have nothing to rectify. .... We well understand that Governor Reily's character and actions require all of us who have any public or internal involvement in the labor and socialist movement to be aware of the Spanish adage: "cuando veas las barbas de tu vecino afeitar ,etc." -and therefore, in this lived environment of an "effective executive government" in deed, and which is gushing from the Fortress, we must make it our duty to be more cautious, fair, truthful and intelligent, especially to those who are more impatient and desperate. The labor elements or leaders who act unconsultedly will be the only ones responsible for their actions. THE ROTARY CLUB OF PONCE (BY TELEGRAPH) Ponce, August 19. EL MUNDO, San Juan. The "Club' Rotario'*, composed of the most prestigious community ela ments met again last night staying up until the wee hours of the morning and returning invitation issue Governor, lunch next Wednesday was again defeated forming great discussions among all members. This dignified and decorous attitude of the members of the "ROTARIO" has caused great impression in social and political circles of this city. Great financier and distinguished gentleman José Miguel Morales passed away in his residence in this city, causing a very painful impression unexpected news. Pueblo de P?nce regrets that the Governor was forced to suspend his trip to the island because he would have been able to see the emptiness that the dignity of the country has made around him. THE CORRESPONDENT.
Atlantic Fruit Company NEW YORK Through its GENERAL AGENTS for PUERTO RICO VILLAR & COMPANY Inc. ANNOUNCES THE INAUGURATION OF A WEEKLY CARGO AND PASSENGER SERVICE between the ports of New York, San Juan, Ponce and Mayagüez beginning next September, with REFRIGERATING STEAMERS specially built for the TRANSPORTATION OF FRUITS. WIDE STORAGE FOR FIRST CLASS PASSENGERS Telephone 347. SAN JUAty. P. O. Box 201.
Villar & Company Inc, General Agents ATLANTIC FRUIT COMPANY HEREBY TAKES PUBLIC NOTICE of their appointment as AGENTS to represent ATLANTIC FRUIT COMPANY at the following ports: SUCS. DE R. CORTADA & CO Playa, PONCE. HIRAM GOMEZ Beach, MAYAGÜEZ
The current situation
Córdova Davila, with his failure, provoked the schism in his party and the critical situation Puerto Rico is going through,--declares Ledo. Pedro Capó Rodríguez By Licdo. Pedro Capó RODRIGUEZ The object of that Magna Assembly has not been the noblest and highest of the cable, nor have we our ideals and aspirations of pueII Y ULTIMO ■ no news yet from Puerto Ri- blo. about what is proposed by his je ¡ There is no doubt that the fetish of the Governor has no faith. However, it is worth saying that, according to the dispatches, the Governor's fetish of dependence is to blame for the situation. The new governor, Mr. E. expects that the new governor, Mr. E., will be able to make a new governor, Mr. E., will be able to make a new governor, Mr. E., a new governor, Mr. E., a new governor. The new governor, Mr. E. hopes that the said Assembly will give a vo or an abstract idea which eliminates his reMont Reily, of whom we can only de- confidence to Mr. Barcelo, who see - lations of contiguity and other kind cir, as we have already seen in articles would be something like a ratification with the other towns, and has, by previous, which is the logical product of the of his policy pqr the party. therefore, application in the present ordinasistema life established by our . Against this movement are those who oppose modern civilization, independence on the part of those who oppose it, and the international civilization created by the organic law and a policy of independence on the part of those who oppose it. Dependence, independence on the part of the national administration of Mr. Barceló and those who give them that give them dependence, interdependence; here are three of the same party fight against this movement, duped by the republicans of the idea of independence and want the order of facts and circnnstanIsla, and then launches a challenge of statehood solution or believe, in solu- - solutions. In order to appreciate them in all their significance, it is necessary to consider them in, how shall we say, the country. The Republicans of Puerto Rico applaud the facts and the convenience of things and in accordance with the realities of life. The fundamental question which is to make the best of the situation is to put the situation to the test of the remote realities of the people. For me, thinking only, it seems, in the life of the Unionist party, it is not, therefore, the 'progressive march of civilization the selfish and personal interests of its own collectivity and of its men. It is a question of the political orientation of those who today r gen lis Unionists are excited are obfuscated, for that party. The question of the relations of the peoples must come to the fore. The Unionists, therefore, on a day of victory and glory, their eminent president, Mr. Ba this historic moment, without the spirit of two these terms are based on that of jealousy, resigns from his office, without sectarianism, without passion, The party is immediately summoned to a Magna Assembly from which no one can say what will result, and without any intransigence, without any intransigence, without any purer, more altruistic, and more noble norms of humanity, and without any intransigence that would be fatal to the survival of that party which has always represented the country. of that party which has always represented (Continued on I* peg. 3)
REMOVED COWS On Monday, August 22, 1921 at 10.00 A. M. At Miramar, Parada 10, Camino de Miraflores in front of "La Colectiva" Garage. To be sold at Public Auction to the highest bidder. 20 COWS "HOLSTEIN" and "JERSEY" 1 BULL "HOLSTEIN" WITH HIS PEDEGREE, 1 BULL "AIRSHIRE" WITH HIS PEDEGREE 2 HORSES AND 1 MARE FOR RACING, A BUICK CAR. These cows are accustomed to the heat and with respect to their conditions can give reference to many people to whom many of them have been sold. They are great milk producers, some of them with their calves and others close to calving. The acquisition of these animals would be of great benefit to whoever obtains them. For further information please contact J. SHOEMAKER or ALFRED GEHRKE, Establo de Miramar, Stop 10. ISIDORO D. DELGADO, Almonedero Público.
"EL SIGLO" Calle San Agustín No. 76, Parada 6 1 ¡2, Puerta de Tierra. WHY SHOP AT EL SIGLO? Great assortment of beautiful fabrics at reasonable prices. WE GIVE AWAY $5 COINS. Come in for your number. We ship orders by C. O. D. JUAN BASSO & CO.