THE WORLD
ginas 3 ctve, ie "tre, $4.00 year, $.7.50
I t Office*; z "c Salvador Brau, 81 1 T*i. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY',
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Pubh.ii "i and di.tributed undw p.rmit (No. 801) * Q ik*e "ad by ÜíFlrt^'^bÍÍÍX "WlT,^"mi^r5J'PÍS* _ 0fa¿r¡f 8 "n Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A- A Bur leeon. Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matt**. t.hm.r, a 1__.... 1 J > U > P< > rto_Rlco, United States of America under the Act of march 8,18 78
SATURDAY, AUGUST 6, 1921.
Raisuli bandit has offered to put in.
''**■-*a *I - " *" - '-' A * " (BOB CABLE FRENCH) LONDON, August 5-The ex.-chief re belde Raisuli, who is the most fanatical* and audacious of the Moroccan cabals, has offered the Madrid government to pacify all the territory assigned to Spain in Morocco, provided he is named Caliph. THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT AGREES WASHINGTON, August 5-The Government of Great Britain has informed the Government of Jos United States that it agrees that the date of the disarmament conference should be November 11, the anniversary of the armistice. * GENERAL NAVARRO STILL RESISTS PARIS, Aug. 5.-Official reports received from the French zone in Morocco say that Gen. France . in Morocco say that General Navarro has addressed an official report to his superiors, informing them that he can still hold his position, provided that reinforcements are sent to him urgently.* The official news transmitted by the French army chiefs stationed in the Moroccan rock allow us to assure that General Navarro has not yet surrendered. The Moorish tribes - the official reports add - are bombarding Mount Arruit with great rage and fury, exasperated by the resistance that General Navarro continues to put up. The whole of Mount Arruit has been surrounded by the rebel tribes, who are tightening the siege more and more. - HUGE GENTIME ATTENDED THE BURIAL OF THE GREAT OARUSO ÑAPOLES, August 5.-A large crowd attended the funeral of the famous Italian tenor Enrico Caruso. Thousands of telegrams of condolences are still arriving from the most dlstin guidag personalities from all over the world. The ceremonies took place in the Cathedral, and the requiem mass was celebrated in the church of San Francisco de Paula. About two hundred opera singers took part in the mass. The coffin, which was made of glass, was carried in another one, made of wood, and was driven in a beautiful carriage drawn by six horses. The Prefect of the city, the Mayor, the director of the Observatory and the representative of the artists, pronounced the most beautiful speeches. The hearse was hidden by ■ the great number of wreaths, among which was one from the municipality of New York. The remains of the distinguished artist were provisionally deposited in a pan. theon. An airplane flew over the crowd on its way to the cemetery. The whole city remains in mourning. TUMULIES IN THE STREETS OF THE FORMER RUSSIAN CAPITAL HELSINGFORS (Finland), August 6.-Reports from retrograde state that several riots have occurred in that city, which were immediately suppressed. BERLIN, August 5.-The German government has published a report on Upper Silesia, entitled: "The serious results which would be produced by the separation of Upper Silesia from Germany". Premiere in Puerto Rico. The grandiose dramatic production MARES TURBIOS by the famous director Maurice Tomeau Tomorrow Sunday Grandiose production of Society LA DOMADORA DE HOMBRES by the beautiful actress "Gladys Walton" Precios corrientes.
Iglesias, the socialist leader, does not wish to speak for now
After remaining several days in Ponce, on matters related to his Party, the leader of the Socialist Party, Don Santiago Iglesias, has returned to San Juan, whom we greetedDespite our insistence that the disciple of Lenine give us a light-hearted opinion regarding the political moment we are going through, we were unable to obtain anything practical, despite having reminded our friend of the paragraph in the Governor's speech in which he declares that the labor agitators "neither work nor spin". Mr. Iglesias declared that he would later give us his opinion in writing, since the matter to be discussed was of great importance for the country and required the most prompt and effective solution. To resolve the strikes, Iglesias informed that today at ten o'clock in the morning two commissions, representing the railroad strike and the tobacco workers' strike, would visit Governor Reily in his office at La Fortaleza, to inform him of the current status of both strikes. According to reports, the Governor is very interested in this matter, and it is hoped that with today's interview the first steps towards the solution of both strikes will be taken. FIRE IN AGUAS BUENAS (By telegraph) EL MUNDO, Last night a fire broke out in the tobacco warehouse "Luiña Murías y Freiría", burning two insured houses, two destroyed and three insured tobacco tents. Justice of the Peace opened an investigation ordering Gabino Roque, warning the Prosecutor; Authorities at their post. Heroic behavior of the people avoided greater consequences - Losses were estimated at one thousand dollars. Caguas firefighters came to the rescue. Property destroyed augured Company representing "J- Ochoa y Hnos." GENERAL NOUET MAKES PETITIONS TO THE GERMAN GOVERNMENT BERLIN, August 5.-General Nouet, of the Disarmament Commission, has addressed a note to the Teutonic government in which he asks that these particulars be complied with: L-Prosecution of the two persons who* insulted Captain Langevin, I read French army. 2. Dismissal of the police adjutant Herr Stand, with the condition that he no longer occupies public posts. 3. Explanations and excuses from the German Government. Two anonymous letters concerning the above-mentioned incident have been received in Paris to-day. The Commission in charge of fixing the frontiers of Albania held a meeting, but could not reach an agreement, Italy and France presented a joint proposition, to the effect that the frontiers of 1913 should be fixed; but England, on her part, insisted on a rectification most advantageous to the Greeks. ASSOCIATION OF EMPLOYEES PUT. INSULAR GOVERNMENT SAN JUAN, P. R. SECOND CONVOCATION To the Members of the ASSOCIATION OF INSULAR GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES: Notice is hereby given that it has not been possible to hold the Extraordinary General Assembly scheduled for July 30th , due to the lack of attendance of the members of the Board of Directors, by lack of attendance of the members of the Association and, being of peremptory necessity to take interesting agreements, it is summoned, again, to the partners, so that they attend the Assembly today Saturday August 6 at 2 p. m. in the assembly hall of the Municipality of San Juan. The Assembly will be held with the number of members in attendance. Luis F. MACHIOTE, Secretary of the Island Government Employees Association.
and excuses of the go-
THE GOVERNOR MAY NOT MAKE ANY APPOINTMENTS WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE SENATE OF P.D.
THE TRUTH OF WHAT HAPPENED ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY OF AN UNDERSTANDING WITH THE GOVERNOR.
Although tempers have been calming down as the first events that gave rise to the political events of the past few days have passed, it is still, however, the talk of the day, the rift between the head of the Executive and the majority party. Mr. COLL Y CUCHI AND WHAT "EL TIEMPO" SAID Regarding the statements made by the Governor to an editor of "El Tiempo", we heard Mr. Cayetano Coll y Cuchí say the following: That is an ínfantilidad. Of course, the Governor could not call the independentistas to La Fortaleza. There are so many that they would not fit in the Palace." Furthermore, Mr. Coll y Cuchí, conversing with several friends said that the opinion of a man, no matter how high the position he held, represented nothing, and cited as an example Wilson, who went to Europe on behalf of his people to develop their policy, signed a treaty, and upon his return the American nation, did not ratify his actions. < i BANQUET TO CORDOVA DAVILA It is assured that Don Pedro Goleo and other friends of Ledo. Córdova Dávila are organizing the celebration of ¿m banquet in homage to the Commissioner, and it seems that with the purpose of exchanging impressions with respect to the aflanzamien to - of the autonomist policy that sign certain elements of the parti-j do unionist. THE UNIONIST POLITICS Many people in the capital are commenting on the fact that in spite of what Mr. Barceló expressed in his telegram regarding the only decent path to follow, and for which he cited that if Mufioz were alive he would declare the policy of Miramar a failure and would raise the flag of the Unionist party. He would hoist the flag of Independence, and after that telegram was ratified by the Junta Cea tral, in the last meeting the policy agreed upon in the famous assembly of Miramar would be ratified again. THE CABLE TO MR. CORDOVA DAVILA On the occasion of what was said yesterday afternoon in the newspapers)} that Mr. Córdova Dávila had received a cable from the Secretary of War, an Editor of ours, tried to confirm the rumor, and was able to ascertain that if the cable is true, for the time being Mr. Córdova Dávila does not intend to give it to publicity until he consults his friends. He has received cables from his Secretary, and although he did not say so, he gave us to understand that in Washington they already have knowledge of everything that has happened in these days. CANDIDATES FOR PARTY COMMISSIONERS We can safely say that the two most likely candidates to go to Washington to replace Córdova Dávila' if he resigns, or to represent the Party, are Messrs. Rafael Rivera Zayas and Miguel Guerra Mondragón. Cayetano Coll y Cuchí, has deCLIENTS TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC We have just received a new assortment of fabrics in general, at prices never seen before. Don't make your purchases without visiting us first. ZALDUONDO, MIER & CO. San Justo 13-15, San Juan, P. R. Button plating and lining. A CARAZO, Bran St 72. i ' n . i
i 3 g j shown desires not to be appointed, f he wants to remain in the leadership *or the House, as that will be where the strongest battle will be given to the Governor, should he insist on a break with 'the Tartido. Mr. Coll Cuchi, who had to embark for a Sanitarium for health reasons, has resolved to remain in Puertjj Rico against the opinion of his doctors, while waiting for the events to develop. WHAT THE GOVERNOR BELIEVED ABOUT BARCELO'S ACTITUDE Our Editor, Mr. Vargas, acquired yesterday from a reliable source the following information, the veracity of which, point by point, we have no hesitation in assuring. Yesterday at noon he was invited to a luncheon by the Governor, Ledo. Córdova Dávila. The conversation held between them 'turned on different questions, not related to the political moment, until the Governor told O. Dávila, that the newspapers had published that he had invited Mr. Barceló to have a conference with him, "This is false. Barceló, "This is false, -they say the Govwuiadqs said--and even if eomo lo message, and I told you in- he Casino, the doors ' of the Fortaleza are open to all, I ncr'could in no way, even if I wished it, invite Mr. Barcrió to hold an interview with me after his attitude." "Mr. Benedicto came to see me, and expressed his wishes," continued the Governor, "that the situation would be settled, and told me that Barceló had recognized that he had made a crass error (blunder) in adopting his attitude." Upon hearing these statements, Mr. Córdova Dávila told the Governor that what he was saying was extraordinarily serious, and that he did not believe that Barceló had expressed himself in those terms. The Governor then ratified what he had said and to verify it, he sent for Mr. Benedicto at the Palace. j 'CHEAP WATCHES' | 1/ ra TüíiIjb )l
When the latter arrived, and before the Governor began the interview that we will now relate, Mr. Córdova Dávila approached him and presented him with the opinion that according to his statements the Governor had formed, whom he believed that the conferences held by Mr. Benedicto were due to Mr. Barceló's ins tractions. Mr. Reily, in the presence of Mr. Córdova Dávila, asked Mr. Benedicto several questions, including this one: Was it not true, Mr. Benedicto, that you told me that Mr. Barceló had admitted having committed a crass error (a blunder) with his attitude? To this, Mr. Benedicto answered that no, that what he had told him was that his personal opinion was that according to the interviews he had held with Mr. Barceló, he had come to the conclusion that the latter had recognized that he had made a mistake. Our purpose in publishing these statements is to demonstrate how an erroneous interpretation of phrases had given rise to the creation of a certain unfavorable opinion about Mr. Baroeló on the part of" the Governor, which "would have subsisted had it not been for the clarification that to that effect was provoked by Mr. Córdova Dávila. THE GOVERNOR WILL NOT BE ABLE TO MAKE DEPARTMENT HEAD APPOINTMENTS Regarding what has been said these days that the Governor will soon make the appointments of Department Heads, and that there is a possibility that they will be made by persons outside the Unionist Party, one of our editors visited yesterday a prominent lawyer, a distinguished leader of the Union and a distinguished member of the House to give us his impressions * in this respect. -As to the Attorney General," he began by telling us, "and the Commissioner of Instruction, they are appointed by the President of the United States, with the consent of the American Senate. As for the other four Department heads, that is, the Treasurer, the Commissioner of the Interior, the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, and the Commissioner of Health, they are appointed by the Governor of Puerto Rice with the concurrence and consent of the Insular Senate, according to the Charter. The term for which they shall hold office shall be for four years and until their successors are appointed and take office, except in the case of removal by the Governor. -And may they be removed by the Governor? -As you know, the dismissal cannot be capricious but founded, and the grounds can be reviewed and discussed by the courts of Justice. -And in case of a conflict, could he not appoint the person he wants? -I understand that there are no appointments until the Senate confirms them. So, if at the expiration of the terms (Continued on p. 6) REMATCH Monday, August 8, 1921. AT 10 A. M. At the warehouses of Messrs. Nova and Del Rio and Co. Lema Building, Parada 2 1|2. 420 BARRELS OF CLAVES 50 Barrels 5 x 4 100 Barrels 4 x 6 50 Barrels 3 112 x 8 75 Barrels 3 x 9 95 Barrels 2 x 11112 50 Barrels 2 1|2x111|2 45 Sack of "VIGOR" Wheat Flour in good condition. ISIDORO D. DELGADO. Almoneden" Public.
Polished nickel box top machine Roscoff system, marks time accurately Value $2.10 £*4 Now B = : Gonzalez Padin Co., Inc. San Juan. Ponce. Mayaguez. I . i MOON CINEMA Today Matinee and Evening. The beautiful drama in 5 acts entitled "HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS" by Evefyn Greeley and a comic.
The ''Chamber of Commerce'' makes important clarifications.
Dori Miguel Morales has had the courtesy to send us the following letters between the Secretary of the "Chamber of Commerce of P. R.", San Juan section, and the Committee appointed by the aforementioned Chamber to invite the Governor to a "lunch" with which the aforementioned organization had arranged to present him and in relation to certain manifestations attributed to one of the members of the aforementioned Committee by our colleague "La Democracia": August 5, 1921. Mr. Secretary of the Puerto Rico Chamber of Commerce, San Joan Section, San Juan, P.R. My dear sir and friend: The committee appointed by the Chamber of Commerce under my chairmanship to prepare a luncheon and offer it to the Honorable Governor, has received your kind letter of this date, drawing our attention to a newspaper article published yesterday in the newspaper "La Democracia", to which the member of this Chamber, Mr. Rafael W. Carnejo, in a letter addressed to the same, makes reference in his letter. In reply to your letter, I must inform you that this Committee simply limited itself to fulfilling the mission entrusted to it by the Chamber, that is to say: to invite the Honorable Governor to the aforementioned luncheon. As members of said Committee, none of us made any statement of any kind other than those related to the purpose of our visit, since we had no authorization from the PUERTO RICO CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, San Juan Section, (we did not represent any political opinion to the Governor, nor of any other kind). The statements that the newspaper "La Democracia" attributes to one of the members of this Committee were made after the end of our mission and in his private capacity, and in no way should it be understood that this Committee is in solidarity with them. Sincerely, Miguel MORALESCAMARA DE COMERCIO DE PUERTO RICO " -l SAN JUAN SECTION San Juan, August 5, 1*21. Mr. Miguel Morales, Pres. Manuel V. Domenech Cecilio Morán Chas. E. Lawton Harry F- Besosa. San Juan. Dear Sirs: Don Rafael W. Camejo addresses to our Chamber a letter referring to an article published in "La Democracia" when our Governor was invited to the luncheon which our Chamber had agreed to give him, and it was resolved by the Board of Directors, held this day, that the text of the letter be communicated to you, which is as follows: In "La Democracia" of San Juan of this same date, I have just read the manifestations that said newspaper puts in the mouth of one of our representatives in the act of inviting the Hon. Governor Mr. E. Montgomery Reily to the "lunch" at the "La Democracia" of San Juan. As surely there has been a misinterpretation on the part of the reporter of "La Democracia", since no one has authorized any of our representatives to make collective political manifestations, I beg you to be good enough to make it clear that such manifestations have only been a mistake of the newspaper or its reporter, since such political intrusions would be completely alien to the spirit of our institution. We hope that you will be kind enough to enlighten us in order to answer Mr. Camejo's letter. Sincerely, PUERTO RICO CHAMBER OF COMMERCE SAN JUANA SECTIONrturo BRAVO, Secretary.
NUMBER 761<<
Monsignor Trocchi sends hissfelea an expressive farewell.
José Torres Díaz, Apostolic Administrator of Puerto Rico, has been good enough to favor us with the following letter, addressed to us from the capital of Cuba, Monsignor Ti* to Trochi, Apostolic Delegate of Cuba and Puerto Rico, and Archbishop of Lacedemonia: "Apostolic Delegation in Cuba and Puerto Rico. No. 1319- , Havana, July 18, 1921. limo, and Most Reverend D- José Torrefi Díaz, Admor. I have deigned to appoint me Apostolic Internuncio to Bolivia, and I must leave this Delegation in a few days; and therefore I bid farewell to Your Reverend Father, to the Venerable Clergy and beloved Seminary, to the Men and Women Religious and to all of this beloved Diocese, particularly to the Catholic Associations and the Knights of Columbus. It causes me great sorrow to leave this Delegation, because of the filial veneration and affection shown me always by so many excellent people, whom I had the great consolation of meeting everywhere. Á . * For this reason I shall never forget PtoRico; and I pray to Our Lord that it may be profusely repaid. To Your Excellency, the most expressive thanks for the congratulations and the fine attentions that you were so kind to me and to the Secretary of the Apostolic Delegation, during our last stay in that Bishopric, I think it unnecessary to tell you that on my departure, there will remain for the time being at the head of this Apostolic Delegation, Msgr. Federico Lunardi will remain in charge of this Apostolic Delegation. S. will deal with matters of importance as he did with me. Finally, recommending you very warmly to this beloved Diocese, I bless Your Excellency and all in particular, asking for your prayers and those of all. Believe me from Your S. S. lime, your very attentive and S STito TROCCHI. Archbishop of Lacedemonia, Apostolic Delegate." ANSWER TO MANY QUESTIONS 1 questions have been put to us concerning the appointment of Commissioner to Washington, in case Mr. Córdova Dávila resigns ra..... To answer all of them we copy the section of the Jones Act which reads: "In case the office of Resident Commissioner becomes vacant by death, resignation, or otherwise, the Governor, with the concurrence and consent of the Senate, shall appoint a Resident Commissioner to fill the vacancy, who shall hold office until the next general election and until his successor is elected and takes office". ENERGY PROCEEDS IN .UPPER SILESIA LONDON, August 5.-The Wolf Agency announces that the Inter-Allied Commission in Upper Silesia has threatened to punish severely those who disturb order or try to promote strife. - LADY OPERATED ' 1 Doctor Lopez de la Rosa operated on Mrs. Felipa Mejias' tonsils with great success. She is very satisfied with the work done by the doctor. Theater "America" Today premiere in Puerto Rico La Casa del Bañista pathecolor production of Alejan* dro Dumas and the queen of graceJ "Pilar Conde" with a new program Tomorrow farewell of PILAR COK DE and premiere in Puerto Rico of the drama Promesa Falsa by Eugene Obrien In the afternoon Matinee CINEMA AND VARIETIES