THE WORLD
8.pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
I Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 I Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345 S "MMtaemm.-BseaeeMMaeBaaaaaaeBaeaaMBaaesaeaw*m "*i "n "eaeM4"
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
- , __ . - J I Franceprepares i invasion plan ¡I H IF * *1 ii A - ' . ; > ' | ;,. | .
LONDON, April 5: Dispatches tie Pa ris say that General Weygand, savior of Bologna, and the Chief of Go ; biemo have been discussing for days the general plan of advance on Germany, if she does not deliver the 20,000,000,000 marks by the lo. of next month. The dispatch from the French capital states that there is great activity among the army corps reconcentrated in the zones of occupation, and that great preparations are being made at headquarters, such as the amassing of large quantities of war material, and an enormous reconcentration of troops. \ PARIS, April 15. All the German newspapers protest in the strongest terms against the use of force by the Allied countries in imposing a five per cent tax on Teutonic imports as a penalty for Germany's refusal to comply with what, according to the newspapers, they cannot pay. The "Die Vossische Zeitung" regards the attitude of the Allies as an act which threatens peace throughout Germany, and at the same time makes the economic situation in Europe much more critical. A GREAT INJUSTICE AGAINST GERMANY BERLIN: "Die Berliner Tageblatt" j says that the fact that 79 members voted against the law .imposing the , 50 per cent on imports from Germany, shows that even in the French Chamber the Deputies realize the lack of consideration for the new German generation and the injustice, for it puts the nation in the most desperate of situations. THE PARLA CONTEST. M. Doumer, Minister of Finance, has declared that the "STRENGTH OF THE LAW" - So are many people who, in spite of all the posares, have not yet fallen into the clutches of justice. But the one who is really "Force of Law" today, is Priscilla Dean, the pretty malh-e chora who, in combination with him FRIE TO, (the monster man) and another expert in opening safes, committed a scandalous robbery at the residence of an American millionaire, while a big party was in progress. Priscilla Dean is said to be living very quietly in a large apartment in this city while the detective and the entire police force are racking their brains to find her whereabouts. This ''Force of Law'' is the film production of the season. K - V Advta A CARAZO, Brau St 72. Advt - --" - - - - ■ - - 4- . -■
the Allies believe support ' on the part of the French House necessary, to | put pressure on Germany, for the purpose of intimidating her into complying with the clauses of the Treaty. FRANCE WILL CALL UP SEVERAL CLASSES < 1 < PARIS, April 15.- The newspaper ' 'Le : 1 Matin" says that the Government will call up several classes, in order to ¡ 1 prepare the largest number of troops i for May lo. the day when the fate of Germany will be < 'decided. (N. of the R.- France has today the 1 largest army in the world, that is 800 1 thousand men, and such a measure endangers ; the peace of Europe). 1 . I TWO CLASSES TO OCCUPY 1 THE VALLEY OF THE RHUB 1 1 1 | PARIS, Aprü 15.- The Government has I called up two classes of its Army to 1 occupy the valley of the Rhur on the lo. of 1 May. j 1 It is believed that new classes will be ha- 1 1 1 ¡n soon after the aforesaid date. < i : J MAGUNCIA, Aprü 14.- The Inter-Allied Com- . sion has fixed the new customs ré J gime in the ocu- ] pation regions, as well as the tariffs, which will begin to be in force on 20. - ll Casino de Puerto Rico í GRAND ETIQUETTE BALL < ¡ I A grand s etiquette ball will be held this evening for which attentive invitations have already been circulated s the new Board of Directors of the cult t Social Center. There is in nuestrp l, soéfedad "logante by úsístir a' eflfle ; ball that' promises 'Tésultar 'Tésultar esplín- ¡ dido \ ■ '.i r ' i - DON FERNANDO FAGUNDO In business matters, is 4 er. San Juan this good friend of Ma. yaguez. '' ■ í'-'-'-"''' " We wish Mr. Fáguñdo every success during his stay in this Capital. i NOTICE It is hereby made public that the Treasury Committees of the Senate and the House of Representatives will hold a public hearing in the rooms of the Public Service Commission, next Thursday, the 21st day of the present, at 10 a. m., in relation to the bills on the Oriente Railroad and the issuance of bonds for the construction of the same. All persons and entities that wish to be heard in favor or against said bills, will appear on the day and hour indicated above. | San Juan, P.R., April 18, 1921. * Aignel Guerra MONDRAGON, of the Treasury Committee of the House of Representatives. Adyt.
NOTICE
We notify all interested parties that it has not been possible for us to reach an agreement with the workers' committee regarding the equitable distribution of work among the operators who formerly worked in those departments where there was an excess of personnel. The representatives of the workers' representatives forcibly suspended all work in the departments they had started to work in, which is an act completely contrary to what was agreed and which nullifies the agreement concluded last year. We are prepared to give work to about half of the personnel who previously worked in our factories, PAYING THE SAME PREVIOUS WAGES AND GUARANTEEING THEM CONSTANT WORK AT THE SAME TIME, and we instruct all the workers who wish to work in our factories to go directly to the Managers of the different factories, who are authorized to open the workshops whenever a sufficient number is present to justify the resumption of the work. Porto Rican American Tobacco Co. of P. R. San Juan, P. R, April 7, 1921. *■ X. ■ ... .- . . i
Pabhaked end dirtribrteá andar pemi" (Me. 801) ""tbori""<l byttn aet "t oewber ", l "lf, in líe"> Ue Port 0<t- rt Ban Joan. Porto Bieo. By order of th. PrMident, A. ".Bur ".on, Portmster Gonorol. Bntená m ooeond elnae Martar. >1. 1010. o" the Port Offlo*"t Boa J""a, Porte Bi, ;o United 8t "tw of Awerirt eodor Uo Art of etareh S, 1BT9.
The strike of the drivers and motorists j
It was declared yesterday at six o'clock in the afternoon.
Yesterday afternoon and fearing that the conferences held between the Motorists and Conductors committee and the agents of the trolley company had not resulted in a settlement, we visited Mr. Domenech, head of the company, to ask for reports on the situation. Mr. Domenech, after telling us the results of the interviews held by the committee of the motorists and conductors and the Company, in which, according to him, the Company had made great progress in reducing the penalties imposed by the Regulations, told us that yesterday morning he had received the following letter from the Motorists and Conductors Union, which he answered yesterday afternoon, and whose answer we also transcribe below: San Juan, P.R., April 14 of the present year. Mr. M. V. Domenech, Manager of the P. R. R. R. L. & P. C., San Juan, P. R. Dear Sir: At the time we are writing this letter, the extraordinary meeting which was to be held on this date has been adjourned, with the following result: The regulations before us were read, and then submitted for discussion in detail, without reaching a definitive agreement. In view of this circumstance, the aforementioned regulations were submitted to a vote among the assembly members.
The result was not to accept the new re. s ! glae, the reason for the present situation. . I This Board sincerely regrets that the situation has taken such a turn, but nevertheless hopes that the course of events will change once this situation has been resolved. >1 foundations once this worthy Board of Directors. The maintenance of the new regulations will inevitably bring about the complete ' ¡ rupture of the relations which the Union has tried to maintain in spite of the circumstances which have always surrounded us. We are also pleased to inform you that the resolution adopted by the majority was not to accept the new system of 'record' and to agree with the former system. He also indicated that the majority, conce- ■ ¡ Horrible sudoso auto- ' mobilist in Carolina Last night we received the following tele- ' ■ grtma from Carolina; 1 ' ' ' ' ' ' Carolina, P R. *- . April 15, 1921. I THE WORLD, Sin Juan. 1 ' 'Auto 836 fíuiadj by Ramon To- : rres ran over Aniceto Rohena, Se- < 1 cundino Benitez, 'Ijiben Esquilin and i ■ , Luis Lopez. Three *of them in an agonizing state. It is tternpo legislature i ■ ■ ■ í-dopte measures, (torreo details i ' CORRESPONDENT- ¡ ' '"Lg
The term of ten hours, beginning at eight o'clock A. M. and ending at six o'clock P. M., is to be extended to ten hours. The object of the present letter being no other, we have the undersigned to you with the highest consideration, José RodriguetriPUENTES. Chairman. Mr. Domenech replied with the following letter: April 15, 1921. Mr. José Rodriguez Fuentes, President, Unión Local de Electric!". y Conductores, i Santurce, P. B. My very senior and friend: I have received your letter of last night which was delivered to me this morning at eight o'clock and in which I am given until six o'clock this evening to reply, j ; In it you let me know that at a meeting of the Motorists' and Drivers' Union held last night it was agreed by the assembly not to accept the new rules, nor the new "record" system. I understand that the cbmittee with whom I had the pleasure of conferring Wednesday night, after working all day yesterday with the Trolley Superintendent came to a mutual agreement. I regret that the Assembly voted to overrule your committee's recommendation. You do not give me the reasons you support such agreement of the Assembly, so it is impossible for me to con# (Continued on p. 3a.) > - ' - I ■ I ....i'.... ,.,1 ■ "
ji . 1 i -i ■ _ - Ji
Sale "Post-Baiarice" - Top Quality Items OHIECaiOS U PUBLIC U OSASION TO BUY MANY MU> BtlER AND VERY BITTLE ITEMS :-
1 Shirts 1.98 Top Quality Shirts Great Assortment. í in colors and whites in all sizes, $2.50 value now $1.98 and 3 for $5.50. Worker Blue Shirts"!" very strong and well made, with taped collar, all sizes, >; values $1.50 and $2-Ó0- Now 90 ctvs. and $1.10. ■
I 10c. Collars l z d ° t ! Hard, C lid-d Süperí r All* ios t "maños. s i in boxes of a dozen assorted . ■ in shapes, we sell no less than i a box with 12 collars for $1.20- ! B $2 30 Large raña umbrellas $2.50 n ONE Spanish ONE for forts. GONZALEZ PA Inr. j_San Juan. Ponce- Mavagüez-
98c. Handkerchiefs 98c. A box with 6 .Pañuelo" de Caballero". i good quality embroidered cqn a j, initiates! in qiuy elegant colors, !' there are all the letters-value $1.50 a box now 98 cetvs. 14c. Calc: current 14c. IgoJon tines of all colors, which formerly were ?5 ctvs. for now 14 ctvs. 3 for 40 ctvs.
10,000 IN COMPENSATORY DAMAGES. A suit has been filed in the Federal Court by Antonio Reitober alleges in the same that he was employed as stoker on the "Clare" steamship of the said Company and that on February 13 of the current year, as a result of a discharge of the "Clare", he was the owner of the "Bull Insular Line", and that on February 13 of the current year, as a result of a discharge of the "Clare", the "Bull Insular Line", he was employed as stoker on the "Clare", and that on February 13 of the current year, as a result of a discharge from the boiler of the aforementioned ship, he suffered a severe burn on his face, which caused him to lose his left eye and injured his right eye, all of which, according to the complainant, occurred due to the fault and negligence of the Company. Therefore, the plaintiff requests the Court to order the aforementioned Corporation to pay him the sum of $10,000 for damages. The Ledo. Francas lepresenth to the plaintiff . - The Court, upon motion of this party, granted the same leave to litigate as a pauper.
í Cl.ARROliim . J i "Coronas Caicas" | 1 _ A
The Compensation Committee is studying the amount of the amount of the claim. The Compensation Commission is studying the exact amount of debts to be paid by Germany. ' nia. The Commission will also study in detail the damage caused, mainly maritime. 'i HAPPY ARRIVAL C1 According to a telegram received by their '- relatives, Mr. and Mrs. Hernández Usera, our dear "mi > i gos Romualdo Real y ?u bel!" and his wife Ana María Hemánp ■ dez have happily arrived in Las > Palmas (Canary Islands), around the middle of the current month. u We celebrate 1" pleasant news. :- ARTISANS' DANCE p 1 Tomorrow evening will be charged r an artisans' dance under the ausf pices of the well-known "Bok. rinquen Liberty Club" society. £ ; Theater "America" r TODAY SATURDAY TODAY > , Matinee and Evening The superb German drama | "The Island of the Marked Ones" I -Prices Current-r í -* ■ ■ . ■ T Tomorrow Sunday: and night í" Puerto Rico premiere NOBLEZA OBLIGA ; * - By Sessue Hayakawa and debut of the Spanish Duetto MAURI-MYLLARES - A QA /'-nfavna Taanato .*
Special Packages
for those shipping to Spain.
: REMATE í T Monday, April 18, 1921. t at 2:00 P. M. t " at San Antonio Wharf. ;;; j; 2,000 bundled boxes for | j frotas. ■ i t 9,000 sacks of jute pa- i |t ra sugar. :: Isidoro D. Delgado " ! + Almonedero Público.
.herfect ■
:'í All quality, rich aroma, preferred by í /t ' smokers of good taste. - f Infanzón & Rodríguez : ; Manufacturer".
SATURDAY, APRIL 16, 1921. NUMBER 664.
Ill- | TI TI IB lacassegESg-gBCSHI ' I 11,1 I, -azi Notes about the sugar market ■.
Special information for EL MUN. DO supplied by PESQUERA fc PESQUERA INC. The sugar market has remained inactive, and quotations are holding at $6.02 CIF for sugars from Fuer , tó Rico. Very little business has been done on this basis since our last report. The following sales have been made on April 1: 300 tons Cuban sugars of the new crop for shipment first half of May * 5 cents C. F. New Orleans. 4,666 sacks of new crop Cuban sugars for shipment first na of April at /5 cents C. F. New York. Both lots are of sugars not under the control of the Cuban Committee. Also sold: 1000 tons of sugars from Peru at $4.75 CIF New York. Since these sales were made i no new ne- - gocio has been reported, nor has the Cuban Committee announced sales at their price, i which is $5. 114 C. F., for both new and old costeño sugars. Today, April 5, the market appears a little firmer and the sellers are trying to hold the price of $6.27 for Puerto Rican sugars. The yield is very poor, due to the lack of interest in refined sugars. Yesterday, April 8, the market declined 18 cents per free and the following sales were made: 10,000 sacks new crop sugars from Cuba at $4.13] 16. 3,000 sacks Puerto Rico at $5.83. 5,000 " Santo Domingo afloat at $4.50. 10,000 sacks Puerto Rice afloat at ' 'tk " And all prices are understood CIE. >¥ sales to local refineries. "BILL' OF TARIFF The "Federal Sugar Co.'-' tnurc.ó that according to information received by them from Washington, from good. one source, there was no doubt that the FORNEY Act would be passed when Congress meets on the 11th of the current. This Act will last for six months and will include SUGAR. REFINED SUGAR The "Federe! Sugar Refining Co.'' made a rebate of 114 cents per pound on its price of refined sugar. OTHER REPORTS It is reported from England that owing to the coal miners' strike, the price of raw sugarsa, suffers. It is noted that stocks in Cuba have not increased as rapidly during the past week, due to the holidays. Cables from Cuba indicate that.
- ■■ i i a! - arrivals during u. semaaa (were 125,196 tons comparable with 1143,487 tons the, last, seauoá, and 1141173 tons the same week <lei i last year. ■ | Exports were 93,204 tone : ladas comparable with 77,812 tons last week, and 105,249 tons i the same week last year. The > i stocks sen - of 776,223 tc- ¡ neladas comparable with 744,231 tone. i ladas last week, and 816,046 toi neladas the same week of the pa. 1 sado year. There are 195 mills milling, com parable with 191 last week, and J 185 the same, week of last year. 1 REFINED SUGAR r The Refined Sugar market, is extremely quiet. On March 31 the (■American "* "HoweU", "Arbuckle'', . and the "Federal" lowered their prices ! from $8 .25 to $8.00 less the usual t , discounts. The refineries are making large dispatches as an effort , to shed the situation . --[ Apparently it is a general ge i neral impression that the Bankers are not ifi- . : diñados to extend credit as in ■ í past years , which is causing tos te- -. nedore* to be forced to sell sué ! i existeneias and those . which are on the way > ' do receive páre thus pjatener m crédi r , tos. i i i! EXPORT * i Sugar is freely offered for export. Market prices are adjusted to effect these negotiations taking into account Jas $xis hands and those to be received when traasaccíons are effected. ' SUGAR CABLE . Do New York: ' '' Because of the tariff question sugar is offered at áfi.02 CIF, without buyers." _ TODAY Premiere in Puerto Rico. HÓV Mary Pickford in the drama in 6 acts . "the Comrade" Tomorrow Sunday /PRETER in Puerto Rico THE QUEEN OF THE SEA drama in 5 acts by GLADYS WALTON CURRENT PRICES ' FOR RENT > two rooms for office > good. Visit us Saturday f P. M. M. M. T. Stark. 1nc. crut-1. ' Axivt. .la-'
I Rubber Auction | FISK TIRE STORE | South Precinct and Tetuan 57. ? 314 rubber" pneumatic, "Firestone'>''Miller and Perfection" -; f different sizes. ; ' í; 43 solid rubber, "Fisk". K To be sold as a lot or as desired. X X Sale will take place Tuesday, April 19 at 1CLO0 A. M. t Isidoro D. Delgado, Almenadlo del . X í AMERICAN COLONIAL BANK t ' * f Also to be sold: 1 HAYNES wagon, second hand; - - - and 1 TRUCK HURLBURT. .♦ iia . r-t-- " --- - - ■ - " * i "KODAK" | 11 ■■ 1 1 1 ■ T i" Great reduction in ios prices. We are selling all t " our large stock of KODAK cameras at f the same pre-1914 prices. Ask for catalog x i;; 1921 in English. Buy your KODAK today. ! " Porto Rico Drug Co., Dept. Kodak, i" San Juan, P. R. --