ELM1NDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year, $7.50
Oficinal 7 Salvador Brau, 81* Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345 I
MORNING PAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ANNUAL III
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
r.bll*h.a tettibteé "ate (Metal) "atente by th. Art "f "rt.b "r 8, ISlf, "* te M te Port Otte "t II tot Jasa. Porto Bím. By art sf te Fraaltet, A B. B "r ÍMoa, Portaurtw GeaeraL m mm "4 elan Mttar. fabrurr SI IS19 -* te Port Otte at Han J."" Furto R> e<> rtnlttwi teta" ->* "rt" tfe. 4rt "f aareh t 1ST.
SATURDAY, JUNE 18, 1921.
~T NUMBER 720.
The United States and Japan wish to make void part of the work done by the League of Nations.
A boy accused of putting another boy to death.
The boy Pedro Quidgley, of Naguabo, was accused before the Juvenile Court of the District of Humacao, presided over by the young magistrate Licdo. Pa blo Berga, of killing the boy Aurelio Caseres. The Court appointed attorney Fulgencio Piñero, of Juncos, to defend the accused * The Court was constituted by Judge Berga, Prosecutor Massari, Secretary Ramirez and "Marshal" Berlanga, and the hearing of the case began, with the appearance of several witnesses from El Pueblo; the accused child, accompanied by his defense counsel, and as a witness for the defense, the father of the Quidgley child. After examining the testimony of the People, very ably sustained and conducted by Mr. Massari, and after the Court had resolved several incidents between the defense and the prosecution, Judge Berga demonstrated a profound knowledge of the law, and allowed both sides to develop the case, and allowing both sides to develop their evidence with full breadth and liberality, because it is a special case in which a child is accused of the crime of homicide, often departing from rigid legal precepts to give way to the truth of the facts to be investigated, the prosecutor, Mr. Massari, submitted, after serene and brilliant considerations made to the Court, the case, requesting that it resolve it, according to its sound discretion. The counsel for the defense requested the Court to dismiss the case, on the grounds that the People had not been able to prove satisfactorily that the death of the child Cesares had been a direct consequence of the wound, injury or blow said to have been inflicted on him by the accused child. That, according to the expert evidence provided by the prosecution, it was clear that the death was caused by an infection, due to poor care of the injured. The defense further requested that, if his motion was not granted, the child Quidgley should be placed under the care and protection, with certain restrictions or duties imposed by the Court, of the father, who was a hard-working, honest man, and jealous of his son's affection, the defendant. I do not accept," said the lawyer, Mr. Piñero, "that this child be confined in the Correctional School, because he has fully demonstrated that he is neither a neglected child nor a delinquent. On the contrary, I have proved that he is an innocent child, of simple soul and not perverse. To send him to the Correctional School, confused with other nlfiso delicuenites, is to set him on the path of vice and crime. "I promise the Court, in case the father of this child does not comply with his duties and with the restrictions imposed upon him by the Court, to take him to my house. Thus I will prove that this child can be a useful man to society and to his own." The prosecutor, Mr. Massari, showing a loftiness of generous feelings, placing above his official duties, a high spirit of kindness has gives the future of a child, with a trait proper to his ingénue hidaguía, agreed to the request of defense counsel; and the Court, after pronouncing a judicious sentence, committed the child Peter Quidgley to the care of the father, not without first taking an oath from him that he would perform the duties imposed upon him by law as the father of the said child, and oblige him to report every month the conduct of the child, Thus ended this process, which culminated in a success for the prosecutor and for the excellent defense attorney, our very enlightened lawyer Licdo Piñero. Judge Berga, with an unsurpassable mastery in the course of this process, placing every day higher the good judgment that the good society has' formed of his ministerial actions, gave eloquent proof of being a fair, impartial, equanimous magistrate and with recognized capacity to preside worthily over any court.
"Sims should long ago have been Ha-mado," says Bryan.
WASHINGTON, June 10 - William Jennings Bryan said today in a message to the International News Service that Rear Admiral William S. Sima should have been removed long ago for his intemperate remarks. In a telegram dated at his home in Villa Serena, Miami, Fla., Bryan says: "I believe Rear Admiral Sims should have been removed from Navy service during the last (Wilson) administration when he allowed himself to disclose considerable communications. Republicans supported him then and are now faced with the responsibility of resolving the conflict created by his latest statements. The years have not changed him. His indiscretion increases with tolerance." THE OPINION IN DUBLIN LONDON, June 10* - The London papers do not comment on inciden K, but a dispatch received from Dublin reports that the "Freeman's Journal" has published harsh censures directed against the American officer. The said newspaper says among other things: "Admiral Sims has relapsed, and as is his wont, when he attempts to expose himself to the adoration of the English, he chooses as his subject the question of Ireland. His statements that Sinn Feiners were responsible for the loss of American lives and ships during the war were denied by Mr. Daniels, who was Secretary of the Navy during Mr. Wilson's term of office. "The United States, unlike England, will not and is not determined to tolerate political generals and admirals. WASHINGTON WASHINGTON, June 10.- In all executive departments this morning there was the most sepulchral silence concerning the Sims case. Secretary of the Navy Denby refrained from making any statement until he had received a reply to the cable addressed to him. In spite of the official silence, there was no other talk in the Navy Department, and there were animated comments, especially after learning that he had made repeated statements today, almost defying the Navy Department. Secretary Demby attended the Cabinet meeting as usual, declaring before entering that he did not intend to discuss the matter. (Continued on p. 6) Borinquen Park TODAY SATURDAY TODAY Retreat, fires, etc. Other amusements. Robert Warwick in "John Doe" Titles in English and SpanishTwo batches. Saturday and Sunday. Tomorrow, Sunday: J. Warren Kerrigan's big production, entitled Fields of Opportunity, will be shown. A CARAZO, Brau St 72. Advt. You should not buy anything emplaza if you have not first asked ios prices from the CLIVILLES FAIRHOUSE after your balance. VISITILES IN TANCA 4 _ _ _ Advt.
The sugar market is completely demoralized.
New York cablegram: "ckn thousand sacks of Puerto Rican sugar are being offered at four dollars No sales. Market sluggish" "Average sugar price in the first half of June $4.416." The sugar market in the United States is sluggish and tending to continue declining. The sugar congestion is becoming more pronounced every day, and this is causing greater uncertainty in prices. At the last minute Puerco Rico sugar was offered at four dollars with no buyers, and a great demoralization was noted in the market. It is reported that the Cuban Commission has sold, through Bionda, twenty thousand tons of sugar for Europe at $3.50, cost, freight and insurance in New York. Prior to the passage of the emergency till, sugars held steady at $5.06, sometimes paying better prices; but when operations were resumed under the new law, bids for sugar from Puerto Rico increased, weakening prices rapidly. The fact that the demand for refined sugar has not increased seems to have produced unpleasantness, and as there is a large quantity of raw sugar in Cuba, there is a great deal of rivalry between the Puerto Rican and Cuban sugar holders. In the ports of Cuba there are more than a million tons of sugar to be shipped to the North, and there is a lively fear that the stock of sugar in the market will increase to an extreme degree before prices improve, which would be extremely detrimental. This leads us to believe that sugar will be consumed at $2.50 a quintal, as a centralist friend of ours told us yesterday. Transactions for the sale of sugar in the future prevail with greater weakness every day, transactions being made at lower prices than before the war. The contracts for refined sugar increased in the first days following the approval of the "bill", but the price at which it was quoted has already fallen again.
The mystery of the crime of the Southern Pearl is cleared up.
Expanding on Ponce's telegram, which made mention of the crime of "Cuatro Calles", and which we published on a timely basis, today we will give you more details. As you will remember)! the reader's, Ismael i Murillo declared (foot in the dawn I of the fifteenth raised him from his bed under the ! weight of a terrible hallucination, and the I undertook it to shots ton his wife, Rosalia Rodriguez, whom he believed a panther. The Public Prosecutor and the police initiated the investigation of the case, having called to testify the children and sister of the victim, as well as the neighbors of the house, who entered the house when they heard the detonations. From the declamation of all of them it is clear that Murillo got out of bed; he got dressed; he then called his wife, so that she would raise two children who were resting in an adjoining room; and that, when the aforementioned was going to the room of their children, - the witnesses say, - Murillo took the revolver; he ran after her' who tried to gain a door that gave to the patio, which he could not achieve, because a sure shot that the husband made, knocked her down to the floor. One of the neighbors who went up to the house, says that he asked Murillo: -Do you know what you have done? -Yes; I killed a woman," he replied. The prosecutor, Lic. Font, set bail for the alleged murderer at one thousand dollars. Because of the very strange circumstances surrounding this case, many people believe it to have been intentional, while others maintain the good faith of Murillo, who says he was the victim of a terrible hallucination, in which he thought he was fighting hand to hand with lions. The prosecutor is still investigating this case, which has been much commented on there; and it is believed that if the evidence against Murillo increases, his bail will be increased. Municipal Today - - Saturday - - - Today I AT 4 P. M. 3a MATIXEE "La Chocolaterifa ' EXITO In the evening 8:30 EXITO "Tierra Baja" | Sunday, Matine* y Funciói.
500 machine guns for the "Slnn-feiners".
WASHINGTON, June 17.-The Tokyo Government has begun negotiations with the United States Government, separately, on the Yap Island question, Japanese emigration, foreign property in the United States, and the Shantung imbroglio. The Baron de Shedehira, Ambassador of Japan in this city, will represent his country; and the Secretary of State, Mr. Hughes, the American nation, in the conferences to be held to see how a settlement can be reached. | If the Shantung question is settled, the work of the League of Nations in regard to this question will be null and void. i - 500 AMERICAN AMETHRILLERS FOR IRELAND HOBOKEN, June 17.-The Customs inspectors of this city have found on board the ship "East Side", docked at a pier in this city, five hundred machine guns destined for the "Selnn feiners" of Ireland. FRANCE AND ENGLAND PROTEST ENERGICALLY BERLIN, June 17. Upper Silesia. On this occasion, the German government has addressed notes to Paris, London and Rome, in which it assures that the attitude of the aforementioned general is due to the power of the Interallied Commission, which is unable to maintain order. INSURANCE COMPANIES INCREASE POLICY RATES It appears that on account of the recent and continuing fires which have been raging throughout the Island, and in view of the losses sustained by the insurance companies, as evidenced by the fact that in the year nineteen hundred and twenty, the companies had, throughout the Island, policies to the value of $773,780,586.10; they collected $1,081,121.88 in premiums and paid $1,094,732.72 for fires.72 dollars, the "Porto Rico Board of Fire Underwriters", in a recent assembly held, agreed that as of July 1st , the premiums of the policies would be increased by fifty percent, in all the towns of the island, with the exception of Ponce, where only fifty-five percent will be increased, due to the fact that that town has an efficient fire department and team, which represent a guarantee for the aforementioned companies. It is also the purpose of the insurance companies to pay only three fourths of the value of the policies. The increase of the premiums represents a considerable burden for the insured houses, since some societies and mercantile corporations pay monthly amounts of money for the referred concept, and this comes to prove once again the need that exists, as much in San Juan as in all the island of good and efficient firemen, so that the insurance companies find a good guarantee, as it has happened in the City of the South. DON JOAQUIN TRIGO The excellent friend and gentleman, representative in Puerto Rico and in all the Antilles of important firms of the United States and Spain, returned yesterday from Aibonito, where he went to give rest and relaxation to the spirit in these days of suffocating heat. | Mr. Trigo came only to receive his correspondence and to spend a few hours among his friends, who are very numerous. In the charming and peaceful town where he spends the summer, he intends to constitute a "Tourism Society", to get all the wealthy families to flock there. We reiterate our affectionate greetings to our excellent friend. A RAPE José Marrero has been arrested in Toa Alta and is accused of having molested his sister-in-law, Victoria Santos, 13 years of age.
Tobacco growers are very active in the industry.
I All persons interested in the tobacco industry and cultivation have been summoned to a meeting to be held very soon in one of the theaters of that city More than ONE HUNDRED tobacco growers interested in the campaign that has been initiated against the tobacco TRUST will attend the meeting, at which distinguished and eloquent speakers will take the floor. The speculators have invaded the fields, making dubious offers of $15, $20, $25 and $30. No one has been able to respond to the claims of selfishness. The producers know how ¡ the tobacco business is developing in the United States and they are ready for a virile fight. Bayamón tobacco has been found to be as pure and exquisite as the best tobaccos of other origins on this island, with the exception of Comerío, Cayey and Aibonito. The present crop amounts to more than five thousand quintals, and an association is being organized to destem all the product of the present harvest. Arrangements are being made to lease a beautiful building in Bayamón, in order to install the destemming of the harvesters very soon. The plan of this organization will be announced very soon. A tobacco factory has also been thought of, and the purchase of modern cigar machinery is being arranged. The persons moving in these matters are persons of high social and economic standing The Correspondent. AT THE "CASINO DE PUERTO RICO" Tomorrow, at half past four in the afternoon, a splendid TE-DANZAT will be held at the "Casino de Fuerte Rico", which for its magnificence will be remembered in our social world. The applauded cupletista Resurrección Quijano will come expressly from Ponce with the purpose of singing some cuplés in that elegant Center; and the great artist has been so generous that she has refused to receive any retribution on the part of the Directive, always ready to give so fine and sympathetic notes. i. Afterwards there will be dancing, as usual.
I*^ -iim ri" '■ -m-■ ■■■■ WINS TO BE TAKEN!!! Fl.
Fine silk SHIRTS value $7 and $8.... to $3.98 superior quality SHIRTS, value $2 to $1.19 gorgeous SHIRTS, current value $1 to ?9c, White SOCKS, Fine, current value 50c to 25c. See Our Stained Glass.
SWIMMING SUITS We have just received a Great Assortment, in new styles, all of Great Novelty. SPECIAL PRICES Boxes with 3 handkerchiefs, with embroidered initials .... at 60c. All Letters GONZALEZ PADIN CO. SAN JUAN, P. M.
fine T-SHIRTS, "Conde" brand, value $1 at 50c. Long PANTS, "Girard" brand, value $1.00 to 69c. Union Suits, gorgeous, value $2.50 .... to $1.98 BATHROOM PANTS, Superior Plush, value $7 to $4-98 See Our Stained Glass.
RECOGNIZED BY'WASHINGTON The Acting Governor has received reports from the Business of Insular Affairs notifying him that the Secretary of State has recognized Don Mariano Jose Miranda del Monte as Vice-Consul of Spain in San Juan. "America" Theater TODAY:-CkARA KIMBAL YOUC in the beautiful photodrama "Silence and Obscurity" Couplets of great attraction for the sympathetic and gentle coupletista from Madrid Josefina Lopez.
Interesting FINCA IN SANTURCE Stop 21. Composed of a house on Avei nida Ponce de Leon, No. 191, and plot of 4170 square meters, sold at a reasonable price. The house is made of wood with concrete front and is suitable for a store. The land can be divided into parcels and sold as lots. For more information, please contact us at PO Box 782, San Juan, P.R. Advt. I
INAUGURATION OF A TEMPLE Tomorrow, Sunday, the Baptist temple will be inaugurated in Juncos, with great festivities, which will last until the 26th. The Rev. Jenaro Marchán has been appointed pastor of the church BE RENTED In the TOBACCO PALACE, a spacious room, suitable for offices; (at present occupied by the Brea. Wm.il Garic and Co.), for reports:: ALONSO RIERA and Co. Telephone 527. San Juan, P. R.
Cheap rice will soon be consumed in Puerto Rico.
The general tone of the rice market in New York is firm, with some consignments being available at a lower level than the market. There is some demand for rice, but it is not commensurate with the large shipments entering New York weekly, etc.... It is hoped that the product can be consumed at lower prices than the present ones, which are $3.25 to $3.75 for broken and $4.75 to $5.25 for whole. Yesterday, a merchant friend of ours supplied us with the following data regarding the rice market: According to an official report," he told us, "from the Consul General of Japan in Hougkong, which I have in my possession, the rice deposits in the Eastern countries are immense, while the demands are beginning to decrease, with the result that those countries, such as the United States, which continue to obtain the product, will soon be able to consume it at even lower prices. According to the report, rice production in India, for example, last year was 1,100,000 tons. Siam also has 600,000 tons for export. Saigon has 300,000 tons in stock, not counting the new crop, which will reach 1.5 million. Japan, too, has a crop of 63,000,000 KOKUS, the unit of weight used there, which is equal to 2240 pounds, there being in the East 3,850,000 tons of rice for export at the beginning of this year, against 1,850,000 tons last year While these countries have all that quantity of the indispensable grain for export, the demand in other countries decreases, as has been seen in Cuba which prohibited the import; the European countries, which so little buy it, due to their financial situation and the presence of previous stocks in their markets. From all of which we deduce that the only countries that have continued and will continue to buy this product, are those of America, hoping to get it at a price that comes to make PENDANT to that of sugar, but the fatal consequences of this for us. MURDER OF TWO YANK SOLDIERS IN ANDERACH, GERMANY PARIS, June 9 - Two American soldiers of the army of occupation of the Rhine, were murdered by a German countryman at Aderach. The murder was committed when the soldiers tried to quell a riot that broke out among the Germans. The assassin managed to escape, taking advantage of the confusion of the moment. Today. Great event Today John Barrymore in his best production Dr. JEKYLL and Mr. HYDE THE OTHER ME We recommend this film as the best Cirjematographic production to come to Puerto Rico. PRICES¡ Matinee applauded and celebrated duet "Los Viveskis" and the beautiful and applauded dancer and canzontist Linda Sofía. Evening: presentation of the Queen of the Couplet, Resurrección Quijano. In addition, the interesting film EL SEXO INGENUO by the popular EVA NOVACK will be shown.