THE WORLD
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 i Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345 í 1
MORNING NEWSPAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO >RICO
!l FobhiSeS and <ii.tributad andar panait (No. "01j anthoMiad by the Act of oetobex 0, 1017. on file at the Poet ufdoe of Ban Juan, Porto Bieo. By order of the Preaident, A. ft 'Bur lason, Poatmaatar Gouaral. Entered ea second elsae Batter. H tehmarv 21. 1919. at tbs Post Office st San Juan. Porto Rico. United States of America under the Act of march S. 1879.
SATURDAY, APRIL 2, 1921.
NUMBER 652.
MILITARY DICTATORSHIP IS PROCLAIMED IN HUNGARY.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) VIENNA, April 1.-Reports reaching this city are becoming more and more alarming. According to the important newspaper of this city ''Frei Nene Presse'', the days of the present Government are numbered, given the great impetus given to the campaign for the restoration of the throne of the Hapsburgs. The above-mentioned newspaper, as well as others of great importance, give details of the occupation of Astci Namp ser and the establishment of a non-military government in that city, under the direction of the ex-Emperor. THE SPANISH FLAG PROTECTS THE EX-Emperor PARIS, April 1. - The Correspondent of "Le Journal** in Vienna says that the castle of Steinbanger is res guarded by the Spanish flag, this being the residence of Bishop Mikh, where the ex-Emperor resides was placed in the form of a banner. 26,000 YUGOS-SLAVES BEGIN ADVANCE ROME, April 1.-25,000 men belonging to the Yugo-Slav army have begun to advance on the Hungarian frontier, in order to counteract the royalist movement, which is increasing in Hungary. FRANCE DOES NOT WANT THE RESTORATION OF THE MONARCHY PARIS, April 1. -The Government of the Republic has addressed a note to Hungary in which it emphasizes the opposition of France to the attempt of Charles de Hapburg. "Le Matin" says that France does not de, be there any more monarchies in-Eu-ropa and that it will do everything possible to prevent the restoration of the throne GENERAL WRANGEL MAKES THE LAST PREPARATIONS TO FIGHT THE "BOLSHEVIKIS'' LONDON, April 1. According to reports received from the French capital, the French Government, in agreement with General Wrangel, will assist the enterprise of the above-mentioned anti-Bolshevik Chief, who is preparing to reorganize his forces to fight against the "Reds". For this purpose, Wrangel has requested money from France and England, as well as cannon and rifles. FOR RENT ~ A magnificent and comfortable cement lo* cal and iron gates, suitable for storage, located in front of the waterfront between piers No. 2 and 5, adjacent to the storage department of the UNION COMMERCIAL CORPORATION.
TODAY hi the Rialtoy Tres Banderas THE SUPER PRODUCTION SAHARA EXTRAORDINARY PRICE" for santo domingo and macoris.
FOR SANTO DOMINGO AND MACORIS ENGLISH SCHOONER "STELLA".
"STELLA" To depart for Macoris and Santo Domingo April 5 Admits cargo and passengers ANTILLES TRADING Co. -Tel. 1042. Sanjuan MARINA OFFICE 14 IN FRONT OF QUAY No. 2
NEW SCRUTINY OF THE 'EL MUNDO' CONTEST
SCRUTINY PRACTICED IN APRIL 1, 1921 Monsita Rodríguez, San Juan, 2105 Filar Santana Becerra, San Juan, 1644 Carmen Amador, San Juan, 1030 Clotilde Benitez Rexach, Santurce, 947 Esther Cuevas del Toro, San Juan, 862 Josefina Ruiz Rexach, Santurce, 738 Carmen Jiménez Aguayo, San Juan, 738 Gloria María Vázquez, Catafio, 654 Angelina T. Jin-árez, San Juan, 520 María Cristina Porrata, San Juan, 422 Patria L Vivas, Ponce, 360 Isolina Martínez, San Juan, 323 Perpetua Guzmán, Cataño, 325 Biblia García, San Juan, 324 Araceli Vicente, San Juan, 324 María E. Campos, San Juan, 286 Rosa María Roselló, San Juan, 247 Ernestina Rifas, San Juan, 237 Florencia Quilichini, 196 María. Iriarte, San Juan, 177 Armlda Torres, San Juan, ' 170 María L. Goicuría, San Juan, 126 Manuela Rocafort, San Juan 124 Lolita Oórdova, San Juan, 119 Luz María Puig, Caguas, 110 María Teresa García, San Juan, 89 Julita Márquez Dávila, San Juan, 85 Carmen Carazo, San Juan, 70 Providencia Morrillo, San Juan, 68 María L. M. de Hernández, Santurce, 63 Carmen Aponte, Santurce, 61 María García de Caso, San Juan, 52 15,000 ROYALIST ARMY MEN MARCH ON BUDAPEST - VIENNA, April 1.-The "Arbeiter Zeitung" says that its correspondent in Astci Nampger has reported that the former Emperor Charles 15,000 men under the leadership of General Lebar, take Budapest and so that, in'union Ae the thousands d" adíe toa with which Charles of Hapsburg counts, proclaim again the Empire. GERMAN REFUSAL UNDER CONSIDERATION PARIS, April 1. -The Ministries of Foreign Affairs of the Alien countries are carefully studying Germany's refusal to hand over the 20,000,000,000,000,000,000 of mails on the first of next month. The Compensation Commission is reviewing the German situation from every point of view. This doubt among the Allied governments will end at the conference which is to begin at the end of this month, during the course of which energetic measures will be taken to put an end to the dispute between the Allied powers and the former German Empire concerning the payment of war indemnities. The deadline for Germany to deliver the 20,000,000,000,000 marks expires on May 1, as determined by Article 235 of the Versailles Treaty. After the expiration of the term, the Allies will tighten the measures, which will cause Germany to hasten to put an end to the conflict. LONDON, April 1.-The British government has sent a representative to Washington for the purpose of holding an interview with President Harding so that he may hasten to solve the serious economic crisis which reigns throughout the world.
The tragic story of Mr. Dato
FULL DETAILS OF THE ASSASSINATION OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS STATIST, TAKEN FROM THE MADRID PRESS
1 THE FIRST NEWS: 5 "Date has been murdered!" j| Ecta phrase, repelled from mouth to mouth, the almost electric rapidity with which ' , cir criar. the news senstciona'es, sor ' prendía last night to the people who from ochj * j and n-idia to nine were leaving the Casiros, ' L ' 1
Guerra aüadíóW-Hcy has had a very great success in Eza's vi?corde, a success recognized by the whole House, which has justly applauded him and now, at the session, he has been congratulated by all the personalities who heard him. 1c A
On the last Sunday of February, he spent the whole afternoon at the side of his dear friend, the Count of Bngallal, and in the long conversation they held, Mr. Dato slipped in a few words of deepest concern. Man, however, of a
V a * .Mr '■h BK . L rreixazé.
King Alfonso while accompanying the resjts of Don Eduar do Dato, who was buried with the honors Ge Captain General muert^ 1 in square. The remains of the distinguished statesman were borne by a gun.
A of the public establishments or cfr culaban by the center of Madrid. The commotion was tremendous, deep, imponderable. With that sudden ease with which the social masses perceive phenomena, the public realized the full scope of this crime, a hundred times execrable; and when repeating the news of the attack, they realized that they were in the presence of an attack that was not only against a ruler. ON LEAVING THE SENATE: As soon as the session in the Upper House was over, Mr. Dato went to the office of the Ministers, where the Councilors of the Treasury and Grace and Justice and the Marquis of Santa Cruz entered at the same time. The aforementioned gentlemen remained in the meeting for about ten minutes, and on leaving, an editor of EL DEBATE and our colleague Palacio Vallé" joined the head of the Government, asking him if he would answer the question that Mr. Chapaprieta had asked in the session regarding Mr. Domínguez Pascual's decree. Mr. Dato, smiling, said: "I will take that up, and many other things that have been said by the worthy senators who have intervened in the discussion of the Message; but that will not be, finally, tomorrow, but on Thursday, since several speakers have yet to intervene. Our companion asked him: "When will the vote be taken? -That same day-answered Mr. Dato; and pointing to the minister of the UNITED STEAMSHIP Co. GALVESTON / Vapor "Lake Fairlie'' should arrive at our port on April 6 coming from Galveston, to follow its route to those of Arecibo, AguadiHa, Mayagüez and Ponce. Steamship "LAKE ELMDALE" should leave Galveston and Houston in the middle of next April bound for San Juan, P.R. We recommend importers to pass notices to their shippers in a timely manner. . General Agents VILLAR & CO., INC. San Juan, P. R.
fl* And *coiif6 "arrived at the door of the building, where the car was waiting for him, he said goodbye to the editor, to EL DEBATE and to our colleague, and after exchanging a few words with the Marquis of Santa Cruz, he got into the car, where a few moments later he was killed. Behind the car of the president of the Con i {. se jo was the one driving the minister ■de la Guerra, and in that order they drove along the Calle de la Encarnación, where they were already lost from sight by the editor die A. B. C. already mentioned, who was the last journalist with whom Mr. Dato spoke. OFFICIAL VERSION OF THE EVENT: H ' i í In the early hours of the morning, the Undersecretary of the Interior, Mr. Wais, received the journalists. Mr. Wais, who gave the following version of the event, a version that had been transmitted to him by the General Directorate of Security: - z "Upon the arrival of the car of the President of' [ t Council at the Plaza de la Independencia, and on the way between the streets of Olózaga and Serrano, a motorcycle drove up to the right side of the - AUTO, and from the SIDE-CAR they fired . Several shots were fired at it, from the side and from behind, and the MOTO fled at full speed down Serrano Street. The footman of the president's car. Juan José Fernández, felt wounded in the head, and instinctively looked inside the car, seeing that Mr. Dato was fallen on the seat. He communicated the fact to the "chauffeur", who returned the vehicle, taking it at full speed to the Casa de Socorro de Buena Vista. The President of the Council was each day a member of the Council. The President of the Council was killed, the injury to the footman being slight. In the AUTO 18 bullets were seen. ' ' SAD PRESENTMENTS It seems beyond doubt that Mr. Dato had had sad presentiments in previous days. SENSATIONAL FILM IN PONCE On Sunday the 3rd and Monday the 4th of this month, the presentation of the beautiful art film "THE TRIUMPH OF VENUS" will take place in Ponce. In San Juan, the exhibition of this screen jewel has been a great success and will surely triumph throughout the island. The BROADWAY theater has contracted it for two days and there will be two showings each night. Art lovers in the South Perl® are in for a treat!
The following days he was seen, as usual, active and cheerful, scrupulously attending to the thousands and serious cares of his office. 1 His heart, however, did not deceive him. Not yet five days ago, mournful thoughts assailed him, and it is said - the reference is well-conducted - that his burial was identical to that of Mr. Moret. He broke the quartiUa; but discreetly. - In a conversation he had with one of his relatives, and as if in passing, he spoke of his wishes for after his death. THE SENTIMENTS OF DATO 5 i Those who honored themselves by cultivating the friendship of Mr. Dato coinci " dían in attributing to him the most delicate and generous feelings, as is proved j the following feature: It is known that Mr. Dato was the owner . of the house he lived in the street of i Lagasca. A tenant on the top floor 1 was a retired military man who received i for Cuba. When these pensions were reduced, the military man visited his husband to announce that he was forced to leave the apartment because it was not possible to pay the rent; but Mr. Dato, generated a lot of money. > Mr. Dato, generously, refused to agree to this, pointing out to him a very special type of rent. Some ■, time passed, and the poor tenant had an , inheritance, but nothing was said or changed ¡ i his situation, for he continued to pay "I _ ' GRAN FERIA DEL HIPODROMO DE SAN JUAN PROPOSITIONS ARE ADMITTED For concessions of land at the Hippodrome to establish stalls for refreshments, sweets, sale of tobacco, toys, etc. As well as for restaurants and amusements. For information contact Mr. J. Felices, Apartado 822, San Juan, P. R. or Mr. Jules Larvett, Palace Hotel. Advt. WE WILL BUY A second-hand TRANSIT, provided it is in good used condition: address your offer to P. O. Box 1290, j San Juan. Advt.
EUGENE DEBS .... HAS VISITED THE CAPITOL
The visit of the Socialist Party of the United States candidate, Eugene V' Deba, to the capitol was regarded in political circles as unprecedented in the annals of the federal prison in Atlanta, where the candidate is serving the ten-year prison sentence he was charged with for violation of the espionage law. The conference was held at the Department of Justice, where Deba arrived in civilian clothes, and under his honor guard, without any guard, that he would return to the penitentiary. President Harding and the Attorney General, Daugherty, granted "1 perI miso. The conference with the Solicitor lasted from ten o'clock a.m. until shortly after 3 o'clock a.m. The results of the visit have not been stated, although it is expected to be con. ■ will yield pardon to the Socialist candidate, who has already served in the peni, tenciaría of Atlanta seven of the ten afios of the sentence. The attorney general, Daugherty, will present the respective reco. mendation to President Harding. The Attorney General has made the following statement to newspaper correspondents: President Wilson refused to pardon Deba. Former Attorney General Palmer, acting in solidarity with Samuel Gompers, president of the confederation of Labor, and Secretary Frank Morrison, asked for Deba's release without result. President Hardlñg, although during the campaign he refused to join the initiatives on the case, was always in favor of "a generous amnesty for political prisoners." |L . W -*♦ W - .jag contested Challenge For tomorrow at nine o'clock before u .*oridlans is announced a challenge '*akebolero that will take place in the field of the Morro between the novenas "Army", dej Regimiento de Puerto Rico, and Cataño Stars'', Mr. Julio Safnz, "manager" of the latter, and who supplied us ¡this note, tells us, that his novena csta' rá Integrated by:r all its players, which means that it is not true that several of its players play in the "Borínquen Stars'' in the challenge that will take place tomorrow in the Insular League. Theater "America" 1 TODAY GREAT PROGRAM With Zarzuelas and Movies by the Company.-The premiere "The Author of the Crime" OF GREAT SUCCESS By the ta?de grao Matinée at 10 and 15 cta. Tomorrow:-Puerto Rico Premiere of the J Movie in Étatinal and Night LOVE THAT REDEEMS - By Alma Rubens, and the Zarzuela "LA ROMANTICA" Of great success-Gifts in the Matinee, and works, the Company It plisa and forran buttons. A CARAZO, Brau St 72. Advt.
***■*-*****♦**-**-**--*-**♦*-*-*■* *i**e*** *-"* -$---* *-**♦**/* *-* *-* *♦**"- * -* ****"**-**♦* -ir Tremendous Accomplishment emgieza today from nue- v l vo in he establishment í "THE SUN" I ALLEN NO. 62. CASH SALES. X Fabrics at five and six cents- Domestic in all widths at T burn prices. Etamines and organdies rameans and whites, X and 36 inches at prices never seen. Crepe de Chine at less than í half price. Scotch zephyrs from 75 cents a yard to 25 cents, from 50 to £18, from 40 to 15, from 30 to 10- Top olans from 75 cents to 20, x Y from 50 to 15, from 40 to 12, from 30 to 10, from 25 to 6. Fine blmca muslins í from 36 inches fl-25 yards at 40 cents, from $1-00 to 35, from 75 to and L 25- Shirt dams from 36 inches 75 cents yard to 15- X f Driles asargados from 75 cents to 20. Fine nansus in pieces of £10 and yards from $7.00 to $2.75, from $4.00 to $1-75, from $3-00 to $1-50-f AND AN INFINITY OF ITEMS AT STUPENDOUS PRICES. VISIT US AND BE CONVINCED- "EL SOL" BY ANTONIO HIGUERA & CA-
PENDING AGREEMENTS IN THE MUNICIPAL ASSEMBLY
In the" last sessions of the Municipal Assembly the following ordinances, among others, have been presented and passed for study by the respective commissions: i one of Messrs. Alcaraz and Pietran. tonl so that all the works of the affirmation of the streets of San Juan be covered by a layer of tar or as. falto; one of Mr. Alcaraz himself to use the small square on the west side of the market square of Santurce, establishing stalls there for the sale of fruits, etc. This ordinance would come to solve in part the problem of the extension of the present square of Santurce, since in the same one it is stated that the Municipality is not at the moment in favorable economic conditions to undertake works of reform in the above mentioned square. PLAZA "2 DE MARZO" l "os same Messrs. Alcaraz and Pie trantoni have presented another order to authorize the works of orna, mentation in the square "Dos de Marzo" of the County. STREET NAMES: For obvious reasons Mr. Alcaraz has presented to the Assembly an ordinance requesting that the streets of Puer ta de Tierra and Santurce be named and marked, and that the houses be numbered. In another ordinance of the same de. legate it is requested that, to avoid the contagion among the children of the schools by means of the books of use that go passing from some hands to others, it is. tablezcan esterolizadoras in the schools of San Juan and its neighborhoods to disinfect those. -Don Enrique Afinar and Ramirez Santibáfiez presented a project of the ' ordeáanzá pfflmMWftkr the compilation and publication etc. of the current? ordinances of the city and laws of the I Legislature that refer to the Mu. niciplos All these projects of ordinance are in the bosom of their respective co. missions. And WEAPONS TO THE SHOULDER! Some political newspaper shows him very ; complaining about EL MUNDO because it is the newspaper, impartial spokesman of the public opinion, which helps them to fatten their broth, which is getting worse every day. EL MUNDO owes its duty to the country, which is why it does not take part in the masquerade, which is making Washington laugh a lot, and which is likely, unfortunately, to make the whole Island cry because of those who practice among us the choreographic art of politicking, which has left tiny, almost invisible, those who are of the same mind, and of the same sex, above all, as those who make the most noise in the country's coterie. The little rent of his house. When the military man died a few years later, it was announced. when his will was opened, that he instituted Mr. Dato as heir ■ in gratitude for his generous conduct. Among the objects given by Mr. Dato (Continued on page 4)