ELMUNDO
8 page" 3 ctvs. Semester, $4*00 One year,>7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 ] Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345 i
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
*Mt>u*ae¡" -- "latfibwd "adae >"rns <>"- eox) Mrtfcert- t>y ta, "i -, out, u ut m uu roa" uibm ei /mi, Porto atoo. By arts -""ha PraaUsat, ▲. & Bar laaon, Poataaaator Ganara!. Batorod aa soeoad "lase Matar, "1 1910 "" Pnrt Jwaa Pwrta m TTnitad Wtataa 4 "ari*a wndor the Art ef -refc 9 1ST"
| NUMBER 714.
YEAR III
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
SATURDAY, JUNE 11, 1921.
ON SOME INFORMATION SENT FROM HAVANA
A supposed corre ponsal of EL MUN DO in Havana says that Monsignor Lunardi, secretary of the Apostolic Delegation of Cuba and Puerto Rico, has been working for some time on the Mitra bortnqueña, because he was urgently called to Boma and the Excellency s:fior Dele, gado of Cuba and Puerto Rico was promoted to Apostolic Internuncio of the Republic of Bolivia ,1a which we ALL KNOW belongs to South America. Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. Corras, ponsal, for the FRESH news, which you kindly transmit to the press. Neither Monsignor Federico Lunardi, ¡i.i any priest of common sense and manages berroqueña mitres? Neither Monsignor Federico Lunardi, nor any other MORE OR LESS PEACEFUL latitudes, because we ALL KNOW, except the FA MOSOUS HAVANESE CORRESPONDENT, how the Holy See proceeds in the appointment of bishops and the things that PRECEDE and MUST PRECEDE to the nomination, election and pre-conization of those who are to be Obi', residential or titular bishops! Read the Code of Canon Law, Mr. Havana Correspondent, and stop with this .... According to my green book of memoirs, that Italian priest, that you say, was consecrated Bishop of Havana, being Apostolic Delegate Monseficr Isbarre|tti, was an American priest of Norite, who still lives retired in a se. He still lives in retirement in a stately mansion in the outskirts of New York. Such a distinguished gentleman was Auxiliary Bishop of the Most Illustrious Doctor Don Pedro Gonzalez Estrada, present Bishop of Havana, and resided in the parish of the Angel in the aforementioned city. Upon the death of His Excellency the Archbishop of Santiago de Cuba, Monsignor Barnada, a virtuous Cuban presented by the King of Spain, was appointed Apostolic Administrator the exemplary Father Guerra, Salesian, Italian and today Archbishop of that glorious city occupied by Father Claret. Later, when two new Dioceses were created in the great Antilles, Matanzas and Camagiiey, the most virtuous priest Father Currier, a native of Saint Thomas, at that time a Danish island, was appointed Bishop of the first one. The illness, which soon led him to the grave, forced him to resign from the aforementioned diocese of Matanzas, which today is governed by the very competent Cuban M. Severiano Sáinz, who was the most worthy Vicar General of the Bishopric of Havana. | The diocese of Camagiiey is governed at present and since the time of Cú. rrier, by a wise Spanish priest of the Carmelite Order, Dr. Fr. Va lentin Zubizarreta, beloved and much appreciated in his diocese and in the diocese of Ciefue. gos, of which he is also Apostolic Administrator. Torres, the ILLUSTRE HABANESE CORRESPONDENT, because he is not unaware that the candidates that arise from the voice of the people, which is not always the voice of God, are not acceptable to the Holy See for very high reasons, which can easily be scrutinized by our aforementioned Correspondent. Why are you so concerned about the interest that the Havana press gives to the affairs of Puerto Rico? Are there also giants and big-heads there? It seems to me that there are of the first ones because the second ones are here. D. H. RELIGIOUS FESTIVALS IN LOIZA The congregation of "San Antonio de las Cuevas", of Loiza, will celebrate from the 12th to the 19th, a solemn septenary in honor of its Patron Saint. RENTED House No. 59, Ponce de Leon Avenue, Stop 14. Luis G. Hernandez will report in "The Pharmaceutical Co. of Porto Rico". Advt.
| Graduation suits. ¡i ■ CASIMIR MARINE BLUE FOR > < > i * YOUNG PEOPLE AND CHILDREN. !Í Í í P. SCH1RA & CO. > ' >
FLAMMARION WILL UNVEIL THE SECRETS OF THE AFTERLIFE.
PARIS, May 16.- Camille Flammarion, the famous man of science, as. tronomist, author of many works and notable spiritualist, has decided to reveal to the world the secret of the other life, which will undoubtedly revolutionize psychic thought. The remarkable Frenchman had hitherto kept his discoveries secret, for he did not want to make them public unless he could find the ultimate proof that there is an afterlife. Flammarion is convinced, and on this conviction he will prepare men little by little, step by step; for it is not possible that mankind is still able to believe in a terrible proof. Flammarion has discovered that there is! The famous astronomer who has communicated with the spirit of a dead dog, which has convinced him of the existence of the life beyond the grave "Mankind," says Flammarion, "does not believe much; they always have doubts in their heads; but with this test I will convince men of the other life and of the communication of the spirit with certain people of this world. *He says, moreover, that every man has a fluid which he calls psychic, and whose power is not yet known. "I am absolutely convinced, of reincarnation, for the dog who died more than six months ago, for whom I had great sympathy and affection, has once more revealed to me the secret of the afterlife. "I declare, for the present, that according to my latest findings, the soul exists, and tomorrow when you, reader, die, if you were in life an advanced spirit, you will come back to it, transformed into something more oaken and progressive." .... The psychic force, of which I am ¡ firmly convinced by the last ' proof I have just dfcobtained, is formí. It is so powerful that it can move an object from one place to another, no matter how many miles apart it is. This force will be able to read absolutely into the future and tear the veil of the afterlife. In a short time I will summon the most illustrious men of the earth to confirm what I have just said. Last night at 10 o'clock, our friend the prestigious municipal judge of Ve ga Baja Licdo Francisco Carreras,' married the very cultured and distinguished lady Rosita Lluveras in Miramar, both very dear in our society, where they enjoy general sympathy. The wedding was celebrated in the splendid mansion that Mrs. Lluveras owns in Miramar and before the Supreme Court Judge Mr. Emilio del Toro. The wedding was witnessed by Mr. Arturo Lluveras and Mr. Ferdinand Cestero. We wish for the happiness of the distinguished bride and groom. Teatro "America" Today Regia Function in honor of the eminent artist Juill DíLGADO CflRí! Juan José, sentimental photodrama in six parts. CURRENT PRICES Tomorrow, Matinee with the evening film. Matinee with "The Big Play." In the evening, the film ALMAS EXTRANJERAS and the humorous zarzuela ¡¡"APAGA y VAMONOS"'!!! Luneta 35 cents. i
Germany deplores recent incidents in Upper Silesia
GERMANY GIVES EXPLANATIONS TO THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT PARIS, June 10.-The German representative in Paris, Dr. Meyer, visited the head of the French Government, Mr. Briand, with the purpose of expressing Germany's feelings for the incidents which occurred in Upper Silesia, in virtue of which a French patrol was the victim last sea of shots fired at it by a German detachment. According to Meyer, the Teutonic patrols acted aggressively because they mistook the French for Poles. General Hoefer, to whose forces the attacking patrol belonged^ - Meyer added, - has also given explanations to the Allied Commission meeting at Oppeln The head of the French Government, Mr. Briand! has expressed to Dr. Meyer his energetic reprobation of the very serious act, and reminded him that in order to restore the authority of the Inter-Allied Commission in Silesia it is necessary that the German detachments should leave immediately. FRANCE HAS CONCLUDED AN AGREEMENT WITH POLAND PARIS, June 10.-The newspaper "Le Petit Parisien" says that the commercial agreement concluded between Poland and the French Republic will therefore be signed from one moment to the next. PRESIDENT HARDING'S "Cousin" IN COURTS International News Service. Chicago, June 2.-"Cousin Everett" Harding, who claimed to be President Harding's parlen, te after the election in November, confessed his fault today before Judge Landin of having peisonified a Federal employee. He admitted appearing as "a secret aide to my cousin President Harding." Judge Lañais adjourned sentencing to hear the testimony of certain witnesses. Leon Schulman, photographer, gave. o have loaned Harding $28.00 "to provide lunch for Mrs. Medlll McCormick at the Blackstone Hotel." "He told me-he added-that he needed to take the photograph of a group of his 1 family in which Pearl (Per. | la), the "White House infant,'' will figure, and which he wished to send to "His Excellency" in Florida. Always calling President Harding "His Excellency.", Schulman also added that he had accompanied Harding to the inauguration on a special train. "In Washington he left us-concluded the witness-telling us that he was designated as assistant secretary to the president. After two hours he came back and said, 'Well, I'm the assistant secretary. Other witnesses spoke of sums paid to "Cousin Everett". Judge Landis went into consultation, to sentence. OVER SILVER! Francisco Martinez, the famous silversmith of Bayamon, has again been denounced by detective Galvarin, who found in his possession again garments worth $228.00, which were stolen. Galvarin swore out two complaints against Martinez, for each of which the prosecutor Quiñones set five hundred dollars bail. With these two new cases, eleven are pending against the silversmith. LAST TIME! Ask for the new price list* of !-" famous GOMAS F1SK. BIG PRICE REDUCTION The Fisk Tire Store San Juan, P. R.
HOLLAND REORGANIZES DIPLOMATIC BODY THE HAGUE, June 10-The Minister of Foreign Affairs has asked for an appropriation to take care of the new diplomatic r-organization. In Mexico, de Holanda will have the title of Consul General, and his power of jurisddction will extend to Ecuado* and Bolivia. The Minister Oe Venezuela, according to the new reorganization, will be so also of ColombiaTHE FRENCH AMBASSADOR WILL OFFICIALLY PROTEST OFFICIALLYELONDONDRES, jf n io 10-It is probable that the French Emftjador in Berlin will officially con nao tive of the serious incident which occurred at Gross Streilitz, j| that the head of the government.Mr. Austin Chamberlain told the House of Commons that the proposal for an Anglo-French alliance, even if the United States does not wish to enter into it, has not yet been brought before the House of Commons. > THE BELGIAN EXERCISE OF OCUBACION. BRUSSELS, 10.-The Belgian army of permanent occupation in Germany will be in August, and will be provided with very abundant war materiel. THE CONFERENCE OF AMBASSADORS IN ACTION PARIS. June 10.-The Conference of Ambassadors is carefully examining certain details relative to the application of the Treaty of Peace. WILL THE MUNICIPAL HEALTH CARE BE RESTITUTE BY THE INSULAR? Yesterday we exchanged impressions with several legislators on the subject which serves as the epigraph to these lines, since we believe it to be of great importance for the country, since the health of the people depends directly on it, They told us that they were in favor of restoring to the Department of Health the entire sanitary problem of Puerto Rico, so that it would have complete hegemony over the health of the island. They told us that they had heard what EL MUNDO had repeatedly said on the subject. ! The distinguished senators believe that their friends in the Senate will support the idea. j In the Chamber, they told us, this matter will be discussed today, which, we believe, will have a positive result. We do not know the attitude of the House on the matter, but we believe it will succeed, since the other time it was brought to the floor there were those who called for its consideration. As far as the Senate is concerned, we are of the opinion that it will pass without hesitation. 1 ~ , , Municipal Theater | j¡ L ¡| Today - - Saturday - - Today l MATI EE AT 4 P. M. I! Interim Marriage I , - B I XITO At 1* night 8:30 SUCCESS i 'I |THE MOTHER p Tomorrow, Matin** and Function FOR NEW YORK On the steamer "San Lorenzo" embark shortly for New York the distinguished gentleman Don Andres Roman and his beautiful daughter Margarita, who are going North on a pleasure trip. Happy voyage we wish them...
THE FIRST BILLION ! DELIVERED BY GERMANIAPARIS, June 10-The Finance Committee, of the House, has addressed to Mr. Briand a letter concerning the distribution of the first billion two by A1 ?In this letter he asks that priority be given to the French Republic, to whom this right corresponds by virtue of the second paragraph of the Spa Treaty, in the part which refers to the advances made by France to Germany for the supplies of coal, which the agreement stipulated should be reimbursed not later than the first of May, in advance of the first payments made by the nation in arrears.-Questioned by an editor of the newspaper "Le Matin" of Paris, the crown prince of the Japanese throne, Hirosito, (xposed that he is truly delighted with his trip to France, and added that Japan feels for the French Republic the gratitude of having contributed to the triumph of the cause of law in Humanity. He also said he was convinced that no cloud would ever come between the two countries, which celebrated cordially and together to restore peace in the world. THE ACTIVITY OF THE COMMITTEE AGAINST THE PROHIBITIONIST LAW The public has been warned not to pay money to anyone claiming to be connected with the committee in charge of the anti-prohibition parade, unless the person in ' question presents identification of ; his name and photograph of the oaso a I the respective form au- * torized by the said committee with the respective seal and signs of the Anti- . Prohibition Paradea Committee. This is necessary because the committee does not accept money from persons owning hotels, restaurants or liquor companies. The general manager of the piracy, ¡ F. C- Drake, has stated that even though he has plenty of money in the Corn ■ ; Exchange Banck, he needs much more I I pira music, banners, rich cars and salary payments to steno , graphs and office employees. ¡ The chairman of the finance committee, Michael J. McCarthy, elected county recorder of New York county, says he would have no difficulty in raising the expenses of the parade himself, but that he has now begun public fund-raising to make sure that there will be sufficient funds for the great mass meeting which is to be held in all the precincts the week before the day of the parade. Drake announces that in a few days, probably next Saturday, the committee's premises, at 1263 Broadway, will be open to all citizens who wish to participate in the national rally to openly protest the rejection of the Volstead 1 and Volstead. As a characteristic feature of the parade, there will be a compact division of citizens who have been brought before the courts and acquitted by the judges as violators of the prohibition law, and who will carry a large banner on which the following words will be inscribed: "So- ■ mos criminals by Volstead's law." There will also be in the parade a ■ Negro division. FOR RENT At the TOBACCO PALACE, a Large premises, suitable for offices: (at present occupied by the , Messrs. Wm. M. Garic and Co.), for reports::: " ALONSO RIERA and Co. Telephone 527. Salí Juan, P. R.
MALESTAR DERIOOiA THE LATEST SUGAR INFOR-I MES.
New York Cablegrams: Market still. One hundred thousand sacks of Puerto Rico on hand, soon to be shipped at $4.50 cipher. Buyers not interested in any" "Sluggish market. Offers of Puerto Rico sugar at $4.50 cif. unbought, res. ' ' In addition to the above cablegrams, another dispatch was received at San Juan yesterday, reporting that the last sugar quotation had been at $4.25. As can be seen, the future of the sugar industry could not be more uncertain. Some sugar growers, with whom we spoke yesterday, believe that the motive behind this depression in the sugar market is that Europe is "no longer consuming sugar"; and that it seemed to them that the decline would continue, inasmuch as America harvests more sugar than she does not know. All calculations for the future of the holders in the New York market have completely failed. The passage of the Emergen cies bill seems to have demoralized the situation, having created the present state of affairs, really inexpli. cable. Puerto Rican sugars in New York have sold out rapidly, and although the remainder of the present crop will go there, soon this quantity of sugar will cease to be a factor in the price there. i It is not explained that with the low prices of the article the consumption of the same has decreased everywhere, if we take into account last year's consumption with such high prices. The refiners are still quoting on the basis of $6.60 and 6.50, excepting "Federal," which is all maoitied, via at $6.30 We do not know how far this uncertainty in the market will go. MR. JEKYLL AND MR HYDE", OR "THE OTHER SELF" Yesterday, Friday, distinguished people attended the popular and aristocratic "Rialto" cinema, as well as several representatives of the press, in order to witness the exhibition of the most monumental scientific work exhibited until today: "The Other Self". i The scientific basis of the film amazes all people, even those who have read about the mysteries of Indian science. "The Other Self" is nothing but a star ■ that seems to lead medical science into a new field of operations. The brilliant artist John Barrymore, well known for being one of the greatest characters of silent art, plays with admirable mastery two roles I which, being the two extremes of the life of man, give greater enhancement to the film, perhaps the most surprising of those exhibited to date, given the ar- ! The plot, besides being scientific, is based on what happens daily among the great geniuses, very addicted to science, who do not hesitate to expose their lives, even their own, to bequeath to mankind a great discovery. A being with a double personality, moral and sybarite, philanthropist and murderer, a self that murders the other self: this is the role of John Barrymore in this film. In addition to the aforementioned actor, others of no less renown take part, which, added to the rare and astounding argu. ment, constitutes a resounding victory for the Caribbean Film Co. fHWB Beautiful cinematographic production, I in two days, playing the role of protagonist the beautiful and gei nial actress, so applauded of our public FAME ME" The beauty of the argument, and the dramatic intensity of the scenes that tler.envolve in full life of the Russian Empire, date to the spectators an exquisite impression of unsurpassable Artistic emotions. Two Days! Two nights of art and dramatic emotion! Monday the 13th and Tuesday the 14th of the current month in the accredited theater TRES BANDERAS Do not forget to order your seat in time.
THE ATTACK ON THE INTER-ALLIED BARRIER IS IMPOSSIBLE
PARIS, June 10.-The newspaper "Le Petit Parisién" says that bloody clashes may still occur between the German and Polish troops, but that it is completely impossible that the barrier constituted by the Allied troops can be targeted by those who dispute the possession of Upper. Silesia. ITALY JOINS FRANCE AND GREAT BRITAIN LONDON, June 10. -A dispatch from Berlin to the French capital newspaper "Le Petit Parisién," says that the Italian Ambassador in Berlin has joined with those of France and England in requesting the Teutonic government to prevent the advance of the German rebels in Upper Silesia. HENNIKER AND HOEFER HOLD CONFERENCE PARIS, June 10. -A dispatch from Berlin to the newspaper "Le Journal" says that the English General Henniker will hold a conference with General Hoefer, head of the German rebels fighting against the Poles on the Upper Silesia problem, with the purpose of having the Teutonic rebels withdraw to their possessions. General Hoefer has assured that he will not advance on Silesia. threat to general hoefer london, june 10. A dispatch from Berlin announces that the French and British Ambassadors have requested the German Government to make Hoefer comply with the instructions of the Inter-Allied Commission, and to cease the rebellion. FRANCE AND ENGLAND AGREE Paris and this city are pleased to express their delight at the Anglo-French agreement concerning the cession of Upper Silesia. According to the treaty, France and Great Britain will work together on the solution of the conflict The Press believes that this is a question that can only be solved with time. CONFERENCE ON PUERTO RICO In the Social Center Building of the Wesley Foundation of the University of Illinois, the distinguished Puerto Rican member of the Department of Romance Languages of the University of Illinois, Mr. Rafael A. Soto, gave a lecture on Puerto Rico. Mr. Soto discussed with great knowledge and competence the situation and importance of the island, its climate, industries, commerce, population, government and the present system of instruction, as well as the participation of Puerto Rico in the World War. He illustrated his lecture with some 45 projections, among which were the portraits of some of Puerto Rico's great men, such as de Diego, Muñoz Rivera, Betances, Acosti, Ruiz Belvis, Hostos and Es teban A Fuertes. The lecturer was warmly applauded by more than three hundred people. MARY PICKFORD AND JACK PICKFORD at the beautiful Comedla "Una Muchacha a la Antigua" Current Prices IF YOU NEED Galvanized corrugated iron Galvanized barbed wire Twisted square rods Lumber in general. Call Santurca Industrial Company PEDRO BOLIVAR, 8. in C. Telephone 425. P.O. Box 250. SAN JUAN. Advt Button plating and lining. To CARAZO, Bran St 72. Advt,