8 píglnu 3 ctv", Semester, 84.00 One year,87.50
THE WORLD
Oflelnasl Salvador Briu, 87 Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO III j 8AN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
PabUhM étetrikxMé uta Mnul iJK Mu) MtMtnta by the -<"tata A 1S1T, file *t tha Peal Ófta et ■aa Jasa. Porta Rtaa. By "rta el "he rvairitat, A B. Bw laaon, PoatauaMr GanaraL Batarafi aa aaaaafi alaaa ■attar, fateaaay "1. lUlfi, al tta Paal <Hta at a. n Jwaa. Porte B* co. united Rtetea at taaríaa "ata ta ta ef aarah B, Utt II.
SATURDAY, JUNE 25, 1921. NUMBER 726.
Numerous bootlegs of liquor at Bayamon.
On Wednesday at about half past six in the morning in the yard of the house of Francisco Gofiiz, Betances Street, in Bayamon, an important contraband of liquor was surprised, consisting of ELEVEN cans of five gallons each of a rum that all those who appeared at the site of the "discovery*, qualified as of superior quality. The capture was made by the sergeant of the insular, Andres Perez Gradan, and the policeman Francisco Agostini. In custody of the precious liquid was found the individual Jacinto Alvares resident in the neighborhood of "Maleza Baja**, of Aguadilla, who was taken to the police headquarters to continue there the pertinent investigations. According to the preliminary investigation, said contraband was brought in a car in a very disguised manner, which is why it was able to cross most of the northern part of the island to reach Bayamon, perhaps unaware of the driver of the prohibited liquid that here '-the giant died*', When the neighbors found out that in the yard of the sefior Gofiiz had been found an article so persecuted, the voice of alarm spread, filling the street in a moment of infinity of curio sos that lamented so great economic disaster that would culminate with the visit to our penitentiary of the Alvarez. Sergeant Gracianí had the rum cans loaded into a passing automobile, being followed by a large crowd that perhaps awaited the distribution of such valuable booty. Regarding such a remarkable find, we can say that Bayamón seems to have become a deposit of intoxicating drinks, which the police are rapidly discovering, as can be seen by the smuggling that has taken place during the past week. -In the house of Casimiro Colón, located on Combrío street, Corporal Fidel Mateo, by means of a search warrant, found a contraband of sixty ties bottles of rum.
i of rum. In the courtyard of the house of Jacinto Cotto, on Comerio Street, the police also found eighteen bottles buried in the ground, and their "exhumation" caused a curious moi ment for all those who saw it, that said contraband was receiving ■ the heat of mother earth, and with great stealth proceeded to make the necessary excavation, which did not fail to cause some discomfort and disappointment, ■ but which culminated in the finding of the "burial**. When the alleged owner of the contraband, Rufino Wei bel, was taken to jail, he tried to assault Francisco Chéveres, to whom he attributed the information given to the police, so that a new complaint had to be filed against that individual. It seems, as can be seen from the previous information, that the Aguadilla people are trying to make us Bayamonians drunk, since all the important contraband that has been caught here comes from Aguadilla. To conclude, we take the liberty of calling the attention of the chief of police of Rio Piedras so that if possible he reinforces the force of Guaynabo, with the purpose of making the surveillance of the Monacillo neighborhood, of that municipality, more efficient, because at present the police of Guaynabo are doing more than they can do, to put an end to the numerous stills that are there. The other day we visited that neighborhood, where we were informed that almost nobody wants to work, since they prefer to dedicate themselves to help in the manufacture of alcohols of better or worse quality. This does not imply a complaint, since the police of Guaypabo is doing more than it can, lacking only that they send there at least two more policemen, so that they dedicate themselves to the tour of the neighborhoods, since that one is a hell in the matter of stills. (At least, this is what everybody says there. THE CORRESPONDENT.
NEW YORK, June 24.- New York police officials announce that some documents discovered a year and a half ago in a local Muscovite workers' union reveal monstrous plans concerted by the *.*bolshevikis'* to capture American ships on the High Seas and drive them into Russian ports These documents, say the police, explain the disappearance of American ships in recent months. AMERICA THEATER Today debut of the Cuban caricature group ''-Raúl del Monte'*, seconded by Margarita Hermann, Concepción Oliveras and sefior Mora. Songs, dances, boleros, rumbas, monologues, danzones, dialogues, negritos, comedias bufas, etc. All for 30 cents. Two batches. Come early Mafiana Sunday afternoon MATINEE with "Raul del Monte". For the no che premiere of the film "Bondad" in seven acts and "Raul del Monte". All new. Come to the matinee of "America. Baúl del Monte premieres today Saturday the sainete "Cosas Cubiches". Mafiana Sunday "La Moratoria Cubiche". Great success.
According to rumor and comment everywhere, and especially among well-informed persons, there seems to be a movement in Puerto Rico aimed at reaching an understanding with the present resident commissioner of Puerto Rico in the United States, Mr. Córdova Dávila, to resign the post he has been occupying since his election in July, nineteen hundred and seventeen, in exchange for his appointment to the position on the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico which will be left vacant by the already announced resignation of the president of that Court, Mr. José C. Hernández. The purpose of these lines is none other than to protest against this immorality, so that our highest court of justice does not become a refuge for failed politicians. If Mr. Córdova Dávila, with a laudable spirit of political responsibility, wants to heed the pronouncements of the Puerto Rican public vindictiveness and voluntarily retire from the post he now holds, his duty is well marked and his friends, defenders or co-religionists should not try to twist it. In these days of world political turmoil in which, by virtue of profound economic and social upheavals, so many false idols and even statesmen of stature, stimulated by the intelligent criticism of an enlightened public opinion, are rolling on the ground everywhere, the man of truly high standards of conduct who has failed has no choice but to retire to private life, on pain of being confused with phonies, merchants and opportunists of politics. That lofty and honorable position of Chief Justice of our Supreme Court should be reserved for those who have achieved constructive victories in our jurisprudence and not for the embarrassment of men who have failed so supremely and disgracefully in our unfortunate politics. And it should be noted that in writing these lines we are not motivated by the slightest personal animosity, nor by the slightest desire to intervene in this lamentable political situation, much less to hinder the well-known ambitions of Mr. Córdova Dávila. Personally, I must confess that I count Mr. Córdova Dávila among my friends and I regret with all my heart to see him fail. It is not, therefore, that I wish to attack, as one might think, my friend Mr. Córdova Dávila. It is that for me the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico is the highest repository of our regional prestige, and I believe, therefore, that I must place it above personal affections and preferences, I will report* from Mayagüez that on the beach of that city there was a fight between Matías Mangual and Benito Bacó, the former a striker and the latter a strikebreaker of the railroad company. During the fight, 2 revolver shots were fired, and the police arrested the contenders. A 9 millimeter revolver was seized and bail was set for them. RENTED At the TOBACCO PALACE, a large premises, suitable for offices; (currently occupied by the Brea. Wm. M. Garic and Co.), for reports:: ALONSO RIERA and Co. Telephone 527. San Juan, P R Aúvt.
Brazil coffee affects the market for ours in N. Y. A little firmer tone has been noted in coffee and at the close of last week prices were from 2 points higher to 12 points lower. However, there have been very few new buyers from outside; better demand has been in evi dence of commercial interests. This has been caused by continued strength in Brazil, which has actually influenced the purchase of futures by prominent importers. The continued strength in Brazil, however, is not such as is likely to encourage new purchases from outside here, but on the other hand there are indications that the "long weary" take advantage of the rise or increase in prices to reduce their relevance. The Brazilian wires report frosty weather in several districts but so far there has been no intimation that it has caused any damage to the blossom outlook. During the next few months weather conditions will be a somewhat important factor in the market, firm month offers from Brazil continue to be well above parity with this market and, consequently, no denials are being made on cost and freight, coffee. Purchases for the future from Brazil have been comparatively weak and stocks here are again well down.
POK THE HONOR OF THE SUPREME
The Supreme Council is composed of men of the highest reputation and professional culture, and I was truly humiliated and filled with shame and pain that from now on it should be said that this bastion of Puerto Rican honor had been transformed into a useless and shameful dumping ground for our political parties. To the men who fail in the Lenine definitively renounces to extend the Comcnist revolution DECLARING ITHAT HE WISHES TO ENTER INTO CONVENTION WITH FOREIGN CAPITALISTS ■" ." By ROBERT J. PREW Corresponding Editor, Universal Service. Special wire dispatch. LONDON, June 17- - Leonidas K rassin, representative of the Sovietist government in London, responding to the solicitations of foreign capitalists seeking to obtain conse- quences in Ruda, gave to publicity statements explaining why the foreign policy of the dictator of the Soviets, Nicolai Lenine, has changed. "The accusations made against my government of conspiring in Constantinople and Ireland are absolutely false, the statement says. It would be desirable for those who criticize the Soviets to understand that in recent months a great change has taken place in Russia's total policy. It hopes that the example of England will be followed by the United States, France and Italy, as well as by the Scandinavian countries. Moscow understands that anything resembling a communist revolution in southern Europe is more or less distant. "As far as foreign trade is concerned, Moscow has recognized private property- Farmers have been left free and allowed to trade with each other: Moscow has created the essential elements of a new bourgeoisie without the slightest fundamentals of the old one and under rigid democratic pattern. Russia will cordially welcome foreign capitalists, why not
(Continued e* 1" p. 3a.)
': ■ \ i' t' ? ' R' 1 ' ' '' The grandiose blockbuster "HELIOTROPO" Extraordinary film with an intense plot. The sacrifice of a father for the salvation of his daughter Precios Corrientes. Tomorrow Sunday in the matinee and evening, reappearance of the applauded DUETTO "LOS VIVESKIS" and the beautiful coupletista and dancer LINDA SOFIA. The monumental production "La Gran Aventura" will be shown for the child Breez and Eason, 8 years old.
The political, as well as those who fail in the forum, should not snow the Magistracy anywhere, much less in Puerto Rico where we need to strengthen rather than weaken the cult of the law and judicial processes. Political failures such as that of Mr. Córdova Dávila wrest from the sufferer a large part of his respectability before public opinion and thus lower not only his own prestige but that of everything he touches. Therefore, anyone can easily understand that if today we in Puerto Rico were to set such a regrettable precedent as the one proposed by those who unwisely want to take Mr. Córdova Dávila to the Supreme Court, our Magistracy would have to suffer the most harmful consequences, because instead of maintaining the undisputed prestige that its illustrious members enjoy today, the proven respectability of that august tribunal would falter and its decadence would soon begin. And, furthermore, if we were to take Mr. Córdova Dávila to the Supreme Court, would there not always be the danger that he would project in his decisions the same views and the same sentiments that have produced his failure as a poht(co? Would there not always be the danger that he would make from his high seat on the Supreme Court the same statements and say the same foolish things that have robbed him of his prestige and made him ridiculous in Washington and in Puerto Rico? And, on the other hand, does Puerto Rico not have men of acclaimed pro-fessional reputation in the forum who can bring to that high court greater prestige and respectability than Córdova Dávila, the failed politician? And if it is a question of the office of President, does that same tribunal not have other men, another illustrious Puerto Rican, of integrity, without blemish, without spot, whom the people respect and revere, who could replace Don José C. Hernández? Alas for the day when such a precedent is set among our people; alas for the day when we forget that our Supreme Court should only be composed of men of the highest moral character and the most acclaimed reputation for knowledge, prestige, respectability and influence! Our courts are the best guarantee of our liberties and the most resolute protection of our rights. Let us not allow merchants to trade in them; let us not allow the honor of our highest Magistracy to be sullied where the filth and mire of our politics have not yet reached. Pedro Capó RODRIGUEZ, "IZZIQUIEL" This "fan", proposes, after the 4th of July, to bring to this city the "teams" "Mayagüez" and "Ponce", in order to play in the Uga del Morro". The amount that the "cost of bringing the two teams will be collected from sports fans, since it is well known that in the aforementioned League no admission fee can be charged unless it is for charitable purposes. The teams that will compete with the visitors will be "Fisk" and "Puerto Rico".
The famous "Royal Motor" gasoline has arrived. Guaranteed quality, top class. American Trading Corp, of P. R. Stop 8 Telephone J>S8. Button plating and lining. A CARAZO, Brau St. 72.
Latest information on sugar market. New York Cablegram: "Market sustained. Sales of Puerto Rican sugar at SI 1|8 cif. Buyers at $4z. Refined sugar at $5.50." MARKET SITUATION Developments in the sugar market of late have again ceased to lend any stimulus, nor has there been any indication that the depression is over. Further declines have been recorded in both refined sugar, without stimulating orders, and it is becoming more certain that consumers and distributors are trying to maintain their conservative policy and make purchases only as their needs require. While most of the trade maintains a pessimistic mood, feeling that only active and renewed orders for refined sugar would stop the depression in the market, it is evident that a growing number are beginning to take into consideration the comparatively low quotations now prevailing and are watching developments more closely. While the raw sugar market has been very quiet, and a comparatively small volume of business has been done, prices have fallen further during the week. As orders for refined sugar have continued to be very slow, refiners have held back on making purchases of raw sugars, with holders showing increased anxiety concerning the reduction of their stocks. It has been noted that orders have improved somewhat for duty paid sugars, due to the fact that these sugars can be used more advantageously to fill export orders for refining. Canadian interests have been showing increased buying interest, but no news of their purchases has been given. Press cablegrams from Cuba report that the House of Representatives has voted that (Ce "Wiú" e" page M
Major suit against French cable company American attorney O. B- Frazer, representing "Luiña, Murías y Freiría, S- en C-" has filed suit in Federal Court, against the French Cable Company, in claim in the sum of $8,400 and costs, the plaintiffs alleging therein that they have suffered considerable loss by reason of the defendants' failure to deliver in due course a triple rate cablegram, which was sent to New York by the plaintiffs and which related to the sale of 400 barrels of tobacco. The history of the case, as appears from the complaint filed, is that the plaintiff corporation sent on March 14, a cablegram to its agent in New York, directing him to make a sale of tobacco, and that because its agent did not receive the cablegram sent until the 22d day of March, and because the price of tobacco had fallen by 12 cents per pound, during the intervening time the plaintiff claims to have asked for $8,400, to be paid by the Cable Company. The plaintiff says that the defendant Company accepted the transmission of the cablegram on an "urgent" basis, having the right of primacy over the other messages pending transmission in the office, and accepted the payment of the rate three times its current price of 40 cents a word, or $1-20 a wordBANCO MASONICO DE PTO. RICO SAN JUAN, P. R. CONVOCATORY The Board of Directors of this Bank in its Session held on the 21st of the present, agreed that the Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders, to give account to the same with the liquidation, end of the present financial year, and to deal with other matters of interest to the Corporation, be held on the sixteenth day of July next > at two o'clock in the afternoon in the same office at 5 Tetuán Street. W. F. LIPPITT, President. San Juan, P. R., June 25, 1921.
We have just received GALVANIZED IRON WIRED No. 24 of 6' to 10' PLAIN No. 24, No. 26 and No. 28 of 3'x6' CUBAN TILES No. 29 of 2'xT Unbeatable prices SOBRINOS de EZQUIAGA San Juan, P. R.
UNDERWEAR for GENTLEMEN.
Shirts and Shorts. Style B. V. D. 3 for $1.00. Sealpax 75 ctvs. one. Reis (ep dot) $1.00 one. Id. id. mercerized $1.50 one. Crepe Sante Rumpf T-shirts $2.25. Pajamas from $1.75 to $5.00 one.
Reis" wool bathing suits. *
Socks. Catalan yarn $1 pair. Hóleproof (mercerized) 65c. pair. French yarn Scotland $1. pair. Onyx (mercerized) 45 ctvs. pair.
Shirts. Choice assortment. 75c., 90c., $1.25, $2, $2.25, $2.50 and $3.50. Silk: $10 to $4.90. Yarn pants (Catalan) $2.50 and $3.50. Military style 65 ctvs.
ISucs. of A. Mayol & Co. San Juan.
"No diú fiel tación a
SAYS SIMS REPLYING TO DENBY. Universal Service. WASHINGTON, June 15 A reply has reached this city to the cablegram which the Secretary of the Navy addressed to Rear Admiral Sims asking him if there was any error in the interpretation given to words spoken in London on the occasion of remarks made in regard to those in the United States who sympathize with Sinn Fein Secretary Denby has stated that Rear Admiral Sims says that no faithful interpretation was given to his words, although that does not mean that the incident has ended. The cablegram sent by Rear Admiral Sims reads as follows: "The statements attributed to me are not a faithful interpretation of my words. The text is confusing. The report is not accurate. The words spoken by me were the same words that I have repeated several times in the United States, have written in a book and have pronounced in several speeches, in the spirit of strengthening relations between the English colonies". The 'secretary of the Navy, after reading the message gave orders that it should be published, but reserved comment The report of the marine department merely states that, "The following dispatch has been received from Rear Admiral Sims." To as many questions addressed to him to ascertain whether the complexion of the matter had changed, he merely said that he had nothing to communicate in regard to it. The Secretary of the Navy said he expected no further developments until Rear Admiral Sims returned to the United States.
interpreting his words."
Other Navy Department officials were more explicit in their assessments, saying that in their view, Rear Admiral Sims' message was confusing and evasive in tone, but that instead of answering the Secretary of the Navy's question categorically, he merely said that the interpretation given to his words was not correct, They believe that the phrases used by the Rear Admiral are an attempt to avoid a definitive "yes or no" answer, particularly in that sentence referring to American "dunces" sympathetic to the cause of Ireland WASHINGTON, June 15. - Rear Admiral W. S- Sims has been ordered to embark immediately for the United States on account of The leave granted him having been revoked. Secretary Denby, on his own initiative, sent him the following cablegram: "Your leave has been revoked- Re" gress immediately and report in person to the Secretary of the Navy. Acknowledge receipt." The immediate cause which determined the Secretary of the Navy to send this cablegram was that he had not received a reply to the one he had previously sent him, asking him whether the words he had spoken in reference to those in the United States who sympathize with Sinn Feinin had been accurately interpreted.