ELMONDO
"- -my*- i" *"*■*■- i"| < - zniimn 10 pages 3 ctvs, Semester, $4.00 A year,$7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
vuMi*a "a "aa aismtaM* permit (Mo. MI) ""tauriied o, ACt Vi -PCbVÜCl 0, 11*17, va the Post Offlee -! Baa Jua. Porto Bieo. By order of the Proaidoat, á. 8. Bor Mton, Poeuuasior Uonoral. Knwrod m oooond elsoa matter. fobraarr 31. 1010, at tbo Port OfSce at p Hi { ' --<<"■<"tw al America andar the Art of marsh 8, 18TO.
SATURDAY, MARCH 26, 1921.
NUMBER 646.
What Dr. R. B. Hill says about the situationaclual Interesting utterances of the eminent physician which should be made known to the general public.
We have collected some impressions of Dr. Bola B. HUI, who directs with great success the pest control campaign in San Juan. The manifestations. clones of the eminent physician are of exceptional importance, for which reason we hasten to transmit them to the public, since they refer to a matter of public interest and of supreme importance. THE RESULTS OBTAINED SO FAR -How is the anti-rat campaign developing, Doctor? -So far the work continues to be done effectively, and I can say that I am pleased with the results we are getting. Our campaign is a very delicate one, and we take special care to make it as complete as possible. We are taking our activities to every corner of the city and the offensive is being carried out with firm energy and persistence. In San Juan, Santurce and Puerta de Tierra have been caught, as you know, several rats, infected; the number reaches 46 They are sporadic cases that contribute to make more di >ffi >cult and complicated the work of the Sanitation. There are numerous rats in existence and they are now in full and vigorous bloom; this circumstance makes the work of extinction slow, in order to obtain more profitable results. 300 RATS ARE CAPTU, BAN DAILY The daily proportion of rats captured reaches 300; not counting from lúe IR|e, the* which s|Rre "tf| dead, or those which are not reported to this office. In 1912 the largest number of rats caught in one week reached 828. Ac ' /tnally, in the brief space of four weeks, approximately 1,000 rats have been caught. ■ dementedly ten thousand. This shows that the rats, instead of diminishing, have increased in number and radius. This requires, of course, greater precau clones and more care on the part of the j Health and the public. CRISIS IN RATS The immigrant habit of rats is a speculative element in the spread of the epidemic. It is a natural phenomenon that can be explained by a shortage or lack of food or an extreme limit of hardship that puts the rodents in the hard straits of seeking shelter in places where they will not be disturbed. The methods that have been used are SALES OF SUGAR IN PLAZA A 35.83. The house of "Ochoa Hnos.'' made a last purchase of 5-000 sacks of sugar from the central "Victoria" at 35.83 a quintet The market remains firm and active at that price.
In order to extinguish them, the campaign against them was initiated in Martin Peña with the purpose of avoiding that some infected ones could spread outside the epidemic zone. All the houses in San Juan, Puerta de Tierra and Santurce were rigorously examined by the Sanitation Inspectors and provided with numerous mousetraps that are inspected daily SOME OWNERS DO NOT COMPLY WITH THE SANITATION ORDINANCE The engineer Mr. Greene inspected 6,800 buildings in San Juan. Of 3,500 of these only 800 have not complied with the provisions recommended by this office nor have they begun the repair work we require of them. It is necessary that in all persons there should be a yearning for activity, a desire to cooperate in helping the Department in everything and realizing the scope of these efforts. It is inconceivable why some owners are reluctant to rat-proof their houses, without realizing that in doing so, they are fighting the very people who suffer the consequences of this negligence. THE CAMPAIGN IS PROLONGED. This is not only to prevent a new outbreak of plague, but also to stop the destruction caused by rodents. It can be said that rats are the most dreaded enemy of mankind. In the United States, the rat problem is of great concern to the government. In Puerto Rico, sugar producers estimate at $75,000,000 the annual loss caused by rodents, which not only destroy the plantations, but also reduce the sugar cane's serum content and the purity of the sugar. Virtually the island is full of rodents and the inhabitants of Puerto Rico have to conform to the recommendations of the Sanitation, if a satisfactory and well directed labqr is desired. THE "CARACAS" We are informed by Messrs. "Sobrinos de Izquierdo and Co." agents of the "Red D Line," that the steamer "Caracas" left New York on Wednesday, the 23rd, at the usual time, for this port, with passengers, mail and general cargo.
Maryland Casualty Company Capital and surplus over $7,400,000.00 Head Office-Baltimore, Md. ' F. Highlands Burns, President ;; The Maryland Casualty Company wishes to announce that it has extended its business to Puerto Rico, having appointed as General Agents the house of COSTA & SANTINI We cover all kinds of personal accidents, industrial accidents not covered by the Workmen's Compensation law; Boiler, Machinery, Theft, Employees', Public Officers', Administrators', Respondent's. legal liability in case of Accidents. COSTA & SANTINI Tetuán 20. Phone 949. San Juan. J Victor Braegger, Mgr. Ins. Dept.
GERMANY MUST NOW PAY TWENTY BILLION
This amount of marks in gold is to be delivered before May lo. I RANCE WILL ASK FOR COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE 77 | It is alleged that Germany cannot protest to the League on the ground that she is not a member. PARIS, March 15.- The Allied reparations commission yesterday demanded of Germany compliance with Article 235 of the Versailles treaty, which stipulates that Germany must pay before May 1, 1921, the equivalent of 20,000,000,000,000 mar. eos in gold. The treaty provides that this payment shall be made in gold, articles, ships, securities or other securities, and that in addition to this sum the expenses of the armies of occupation shall first be paid. The commission also proposes that Article 233 of the same treaty be complied with, and in which it is provided that Germany be notified before May 1 of the total amount for reparations to be paid to the Allies. "Le Petit Parisién," in discussing the action of the commission, makes the following comment. "If Germany persists in refusing to pay, it will force us to impose on her the full execution of the treaty. That is the significance of yesterday's meeting. ("The Supreme Council," it continues, "has decided, with the opinion of the English and French technicians, that the penalties will be applied, not only for Germany's refusal to pay the reparations, but also for her failure to pay the reparations to the Allies. Germany's refusal to pay reparations or her refusal to comply with the terms of the Paris agreement, I follow for all the "visions of the obligations which the treaty imposes upon her, Germany is not qualified to ask for the resignation of the League because she is not a member of that body." The last statement alludes to the protest made by Germany against the enforcement by the Allies of the penalties imposed for failure to comply with reparations. Negotiations between France and Germany concerning the transfer of the funds collected for the purpose of paying to the residents of Alsace and Lo. rena insurance against old age and disability have also failed, so that France is preparing to demand that Article 77 of the Treaty of Versailles be enforced. This article provides that Germany must provide for its fulfillment by paying to the French government part of all reserves accumulated by the Empire or by public or private bodies dependent on it.
SERIOUS DISPLEASURE AMONG BAYAMON REPUBLICANS
An editor of EL MUNDO, having learned that in the neighboring town of Bayamon a great atmosphere had arisen, on the occasion of the recent appointment made by the Municipal Assembly of Commissioner of Instruction, and which fell to Ledo. Don José C. Jusino, thus defeating the candidacy of Ledo. Manuel Gaatán Barbosa, visited said town to gather opinions on this matter. Our Editor interviewed with significant elements of politics in that town, and reached the conclusion that there is a great uneasiness in the ranks of the Republican Party in the cradle and bastion of Dr. Barbosa, due to the attitude assumed after his defeat by Mr. Gaetán Barbosa, who intends to challenge the acts of the Municipal Assembly of that town, even though it is an organism of his own political group. The Republican Party in Bayamon, we can assure you, is almost totally fractioned at this time. The "blue" faction, when it was defeated in the primaries, accepted the will of the majorities and was united at the polls, thus assuring the triumph of the party in that municipality; and now, when a candidate of the "yellow" faction is defeated, they are rushing to annul the agreements of the assembly, thus ridiculing an entity composed of men of their own party, (Continued in the s )
CORDOVA IAVH> FODERING A PARTY
Mr. Córdova favila has addressed letters to personalities of our political world, in which he expresses, according to many reports that we have been able to gather, his opposition to the policy of the Unionist party, - I and whose collectivity "led him to occupy the high representation that he holds, being one of its" most characterized leaders. i "I deeply regret not having rectified before", says Mr. Córdova in one of the paragraphs of one of his letters, "I regret profusely not having rectified before". Córdova in one of the paragraphs of the aforementioned letters, and makes known his intention to come to Puerto Rico, once the sessions of the Congress are over, to begin his activities in the sense of getting his party to abandon any idea of independence and become an autonomist party, or else to found a separate party, [having Autonomy as its only formula and banner. Mr. Córdova counts, according to his manifestations, with the support of those who, like Huyke, Travieso and other prestigious elements of both parties, represent conservative tendencies and would be willing to defend the autonomy issue against the seemingly impossible solutions of Statehood or Independence. The "Mercantile Bank of America" has filed in Federal Court a claim for S84J against the West P. R. Srtfdr C&- *- The Bank alleges that the aforesaid Corporation owes it that sum and that to that effect it has a promissory note signed by the same and which matured on March 4, this year. TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF THE GRAVEN OIL & REFINING JOMPANY During the week from March 6 to 12, 1921, the drainage of 2 more wells of this Company, on the Breckenridge, Stephens County, lands, with a daily production of 700 barrels one, and 200 barrels the other, has been completed. Work on a third well is now well advanced, having already been drilled 325 feet. Geologists predict that this well will be very productive. Plans are now being made to open 16 more wells on the famous Breckenridge acreage. Due to the increase in the number of wells and the enlargement of the Company in all orders, our stock will increase in value to 83.00 instead of $2.00, which is the present value. The aforementioned increase will take effect at midnight on March 31st of the current year. In the same way that the drop in the price of sugar produced an intense crisis in Puerto Rico's businesses during the past year; in the past months, a drop in the price of crude oil produced a crisis in business. As a result, a barrel of oil was sold at a price of $1.25 per barrel, instead of the $3.50 per barrel previously quoted. At present, conditions have improved considerably, with oil selling for $2.25 a barrel. During the crisis referred to, many young companies have failed; but your Company, because of the care with which it has been managed, has successfully weathered the storm and continues to open new wells. Under these circumstances, the disbursement of thousands of pesos to satisfy dividends would have been a bad management policy in the interests of the Company's stockholders, especially in the case of a young company such as this. New York Office (9 East 40 St.) Leonard WOOD. Jr. Vice-President. GRAVEN OIL ft REFINING CO AdVt.
HUGHES FOLLOWS POLICY OF PREDECESSOR.
President Harding man has rights won by common victory. NOTHING HAS BEEN DECIDED ON PEACE WITH GERMANY The attitude of the United States toward the League is still doubtful. They report from Washington that President Harding has agreed with Secretary of State Hughes on the foreign policy of the new administration, which consists in the complete protection of American rights as a result of the common victory of the Allies and the Asian powers over the Central Powers. The problems reviewed include those relating to the mandates, the German cables, the island of Yap, etc. It is maintained that these rights have not been waived by the United States, that no one has had authority to do so, and that they will not be waived by the new administration. The United States will deal with these matters in a spirit of friendship with the other nations, without differing in their. tance with the manner in which they were dealt with by the administration of President Wilson. Thus the views to the recent notes of Secretary of State Colby and Under Secretary Davis will be maintained. With regard to the Yap question and the respective mandate, the council of the League of nations invited the United States to send a representative to confer with those of other nations at a meeting of the League of nations to discuss the matter. No decision has yet been made on this invitation, and all indications are that the department of this in the handling of the various phases of the problems raised, will not confuse the work of giving full protection to the rights won by the war with that of the League of nations. From the facts of which it is known there is a belief that President Harding will take the Yap case as a test in the negotiations of this country with the Allied nations on the question of peace with Germany. Depending on how these matters are decided, the United States of. will terminate its policy with regard to the conclusion of the peace treaty, either the modified Versailles or a separate convention with Germany. The opinion of the diplomats is confirmed that the United States occupies a strong position in its negotiations with the Allied nations. ANOTHER GUARTA FROM THE EDITOR OF "LA DEMOCRACIA" San Juan, P. R. March 24, 1921. Mr. Director of EL MUNDO, San Juan. Distinguished colleague and friend: I appeal again to your generosity to rectify the article published today under the heading "Córdova Dávila disavowed". It is not true that before the consideration of the Unionist Central Board there has been any motion to disavow Mr. Córdova Dávila. There have been, yes, read before the Board, as has been done on other occasions, two letters from its president, pointing out the situation of the political moment, and of which the Board became supportive; Mr. Córdova Dávila has not raised any question of confidence, nor is it correct to assume what is taken for granted in EL MUNDO that the Central Board has made any agreement against such a distinguished member of the Board as the Resident Commissioner, in his absence and without even having heard him. Please accept my thanks for the publication of these lines and I remain your affectionate friend and colleague, José CULI* VIDAL.
"I cannot pay anything"- . says the former German Empire All Bavaria refuses to disarm. - The Teutons want to hinder the commercial progress of the world.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) j LONDON, March 25 - In the note which Germany has sent to the Commi. ■ sion of indemnities, she says flatly, "As of now I declare that I am unable to pay the billion marks, gold, demanded of me by May 1." About this, "Le Petit Journal," which, like all the newspapers of the French ca. ! pita*, is furious, says 1 that this is a violation of the treaty of" Versailles, although it was foreseen ¡ at the London Conferences. The refusal to make the payments will make the burden of the war heavier for the former Teutonic empire, adds the daily newspaper, and the Allies, for their part, are unwilling to accept any delay. 7 ALL BAVARIA REFUSES DISARMAMENT PARIS, March 25 - A dispatch from Berlin to the newspaper "Le Journal" announces that the Bavarian government has unanimously refused to disarm, as well as to liquefy the militia in the region. This refusal - says "Le Matin" - highlights the attitude of Germany, which is only waiting for a "propitious occasion to join Lenine's army; and thus to refuse to comply with the Versailles treaty, and especially to pay the war indemnity imposed on it. PARIS, March 25.- The Senate and Finance Committees have heard M Briand on the foreign situation and the London agreement. The Head of Government said that he would pay special attention to the proposals of the Germans, with regard to the reconstruction of the devastated regions and to the one billion that Germany must pay on May 1st. GERMANY BEGINS TO DEMOS. PARIS, March 25.- The French people were anxiously awaiting the delivery of the one billion that should be made on Tuesday, which they have not been able to contemplate, due to the fact that Germany is beginning to demonstrate its Machiavellian intentions to evade the payments, AS THE DAYS GO BY - SAYS BRIAND - GERMANY'S DEBT IS GREATER LONDON. LONDON, March 25.- According to a report sent by the correspondent Horrorous fire Have you not thought, on reading the frequent news of disasters occurring in the Island, that you may be the next victim? Why live in continual anxiety, constantly exposed to misery, when it is so easy to protect yourself against a possible misfortune? Insure your property, be it your home or your establishment, with the LONDON ASSURANCE CORPORATION of London and the UNITED STATES FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY of New York, represented in Puerto Rico by Mr. Sobrinos de Izquierdo and Co. of San Juan, and you will be free of nightmares. Call 927 and 1117 or send a postcard to Tetuan 20, San Juan, and a representative of the house will be at your service immediately DO IT NOW, TOMORROW MAY BE TOO LATE FOR YOU. Advt. APPERSON PARTS We are pleased to advise our customers that we have just received a complete assortment of replacement parts for "Apper. son" automobiles. P R. Auto Club, Ave. Penco de Leon No. 85 Santurce. ' Advt.
'of the "Daily Telegraph" in Paris. M. ■ Briand has declaimed that the treaty ' of Versailles was going to give play and that all' all the measures taken by Fran. ' cia since the occupation began, . would give rise to jfurther indemnity on the part of Germany, and added | that France would not be content with the ' grimace of payment. I GERMANY WANTS TO STORB THE COMMERCIAL PROGRESS OF THE WORLD COPENHAGEN, March 25 - The j "National Tidende," of this city,,, I says that Germany's purpose is to turn the commerce of the whole world into rubble, and to make the mercan l cies and industries of all countries j a mess, for she recognizes the j flourishing state of her industries, which [ which puts her in coudición of paying war indemnities. THE HARDING GOVERNMENT EM. PITCHES HIS WORK ABOUT FOREIGN WASHINGTON, March 25.-In the course of the last meeting held by the Cabinet, the Secretary of State, Mr. Hughes, presented a long information relative to the general foreign situation. The press comments on the fact that the Cabinet did not discuss the "Society of Nations." HARDING WILL ATTEND THE INAU. GURATION OF BOLIVAR'S STATUE WASHINCtTON, March 25.- President Harding accepted the special invitation of the Venezuelan Minister in this city, Mr. Yanez, as well as the special invitation of the Venezuelan Minister in this city, Mr. Yanez, to attend the inauguration of the statue. The program for the unveiling of the statue of the glorious champion of South American liberties is in charge of the Secretary of State, the Pan American Union and the Venezuelan Legation. Preliminary preparations have been made so that diplomats from all the countries of Latin America may attend the grand tribute. LONDON, March 25.- In virtue of the refusal on the part of the German Government to pay the war indemnity, the Compensation Commission has been urgently summoned to adopt energetic measures to make Germany pay without hesitation. AT THE AMERICA Today afternoon at three o'clock, big matinee with the comic intermezzo by the "Monomania Torera" company and the evening movie at 10 and 15 cents. In the evening the drama "La chica del Mar" and the zarzuela "Los Carbonerrs" Tomorrow at the matinee there will be gifts for the ladies who attend, in addition the drama "El Buen Cam-.no", by Vivian Martin and the company will represent the comic entremés "Sangre Gor da 4 ' at prices of 10 and 20 cents. In the evening premiere of the comedy by the company "El Jarabe de Pico". In the afternoon matinée six gifts to the children and the Company will work. Buttons will be pinned and lined. CARE, Brau St. 72. Advt. We repair Cash registers, adding machines, typewriters, phonographs, mimiographs. OJEDA BROS. Box 1031. San Juan, P. R. San Jose No. 6. Phone 355.