ELMONDO
10 pages 3 ctvs. X Semester, $4.00 f One year,$7.50 f
' - Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 * Such. 833 P. O. Box 345 : ► -
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
Published sud distributed andar perait (So. 801) suttiorissd b> San Juan, Porto Bieo. By order of tbs Praaidant, á. 8. fenriaeo fabruary 31, 1919, at tba Port Office at San Juan Porto Bi <x>
.i MMbtt a, ISLT, un fila st Iba Fort Offles ef nnMtr Ganar ni BmaraS "" "seond elnaa malta ed fttMn, asaetea andar tba Art of march 9. IS T9
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1921. | NUMBER 844.
YEAR IH
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
Important investigation against a high tuncionaiio.
We have reports that a thorough investigation is being conducted against a high-ranking government official, who has been charged with serious accusations in the performance of his duties. According to our information, it is a matter related to the capture of a considerable amount of contraband liquor, in the process of which the due formalities of the law were not duly complied with. An official of the Federal Government is in charge of the investigation of these facts, who has already rendered his report to the higher authorities and which shows an extraordinary amount of guilt against the official who is the object of the above-mentioned investigation. It is assured that the facts denounced are of such a nature that it is very probable that the dismissal in mediata of said official will take place, even though steps are being taken to prevent this from happening. The investigation that is being carried out has not yet been fully completed, for which reason we limit ourselves for today to report only that it is being carried out, although we promise to inform our readers later on in full detail about the outcome of this important investigation. A FRENCHMAN AND A GERMAN WIN THE NOBEL PRIZE ESTOKOLMO, November 11.-The Nobel Prize Awarding Committee has chosen the glorious figure of Anatole France as the winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature. It was also awarded to the great German chemist Nerst the Nobel Prize for his famous scientific work. It is a matter of concern that the four great Allied nations, the United States, Great Britain, France and Italy, which triumphed against Germany and her allies, instead of reducing their foundations, are now spending three times as much for military purposes as they did before the world war. The amount spent by these four nations before the war was in that respect $1,321,000,000. The amount they are now spending is $4,092,000,000,000. This enormous increase is not for past wars or other government expenditures but for future wars which are feared. The total expenditures of these four nations now reach the astonishing amount of $19,300,000,000, or more than six times as much as before. The people of these nations are hopelessly burdened under these heavy burdens.
P. Schira & Co, Inc. shop on Saturdays.
Great Price Reduction in the Ladies Department. ON SATURDAYS ONLY P. SCHRA & CO., INC.
U.S. Senate denounces the naval program
PREPARING FOR FUTURE WARS (From the New York Press) WASHINGTON, Oct. 31.-A "world catastrophe'' will inevitably follow the disarmament conference unless the nations "interested in the prosperity of the Far East and the trade of the Pacific conciliate their differences and come to a settlement which will insure the peace of the world'*; such was the expression of Senator Smanson, Democrat, of Virginia, in the Senate chamber to-day. He urged that the only practical way to reduce taxes was to reduce the enormous military and naval burdens that burden the people of the United States and other peoples. -The President very wisely recognized," he said, "that the question of the Far East was important in the ominous controversy, if not settled amicably. Its solution is not difficult if the nations adhere to their solemn pledges made in the treaty of Ver salles. China is the key to the settlement of these differences. For more than a century this empire has been subjected to plunder by various nations. But that spoliation must cease, the integrity of the Chinese empire must be preserved, and China must be granted equal rights with other nations. If this state of war does not cease, it will inevitably lead to another world conflict, more severe, more bloody and more disastrous than the one we have just confronted. The sacrifices and sufferings inherent in war are borne by the great masses of the people. The government officials get the glories of war and the people bear the burden and suffer its calamities. As the people dominate the various governments of the world, they should rise up en masse and force their governments to come to an arrangement on the limitation of armaments and reduce the burdens of taxation so that industry will revive and the dangers of another war will be averted. "We are witnessing the fact of AN UNAPPLIED MARKET There is opportunity for the sale of all kinds of articles in the Virgin Islands. ' * SEND YOUR TRAVELING AGENTS The motor schooner "Mystery", which is a very safe vessel will admit cargo and passage every week for St Thomas and St Croix. ANTILLES TRADING CO. Telephone 1042. Box 836. Advt.
COMMERCIAL INSTRUCTION Courses in Shorthand, Typing, Bookkeeping, Business Correspondence, Calligraphy, Commercial Arithmetic, Mental Calculation and Office Practice, in English and Spanish. Special teachers. Studies may be begun at any date, and completed in one year. We teach English and Spanish Shorthand and Penmanship by correspondence. We award an elegant graduation diploma. Eighth grade diploma is required for admission. More than 200 young men and women are constantly studying at the school. Lodging facilities. Modest monthly payments. Prepare yourself to be a man of the future. No student fails in our school. Ask for more information at COLEGIO PERCY? / Phone 463. P.O. Box 241. PONCE, P. R.
French Steamer 'MACORIS" Expected at this port, bound for Corunna, Havre and Bordeaux, about the 17th or 19th of the present. She will admit passengers for La Coruña and Havre and cargo for the first three mentioned ports and for those of Northern Europe. for further information, please contact behn brothers, inc. Telephone Building. San Juan, P.R.
The imposing event held ayereiiArHngton.
Wilson acclaimed.-Speech by Harding.
(From our correspondent in N. Y.) VIA "ALL AMERICA CABLES'' WASHINGTON, Nov. 11.-The nation through its highest representatives today paid a great tribute to the unknown American soldier. The parade which took place in this capital was of an indescribable appearance, and was attended by government officials, diplomats, delegates to the disarmament conferences, and a large mass of the public, who paraded through the streets of Washington in the direction of Arlington Cemetery. The veterans of the Great War paraded amidst a reverent silence which attracted the attention of all the pre. scutes. The huge funeral procession marched slowly. The huge crowd, which included many women and children, demonstrated their deep sympathy for the unknown heroic warrior, showing deep emotion on their faces. President Harding marched next to the coffin, which appeared wrapped in a large American flag, from which hung the seven most meritorious medals won with his heroism and with his blood by the great anonymous soldier. When the crowd spotted the carriage carrying the ex-President Wilson, they broke their silence, cheering him deliriously and cheering him. The i'ustre es ladista was the only man cheered at the grand parade. In the face of these demonstrations of affection on the part of the crowd, the number of people killed by automobiles and other motor vehicles in 1920 amounted to 9,103 in 1920, excluding victims run over by motorcycles, the census department reported today. This number represents an average of 10.4 per 100,000 souls, against 9.4 in 1919; 9.1 in 1918; 8.9 in 1917; 7.5 in 1916 and 5.8 in 1915. New York led the way in 1920, with a total of 773 automobile deaths. "Rialto" Today- Premiere in - Puerto Rico-"William S. Hart" in Artcraft drama in 6 acts La Piedra líe Toque NOTE: Tonight we inaugurate the "CHIC'' tanda from 9 to 10:30 There will be concert by the orchestra, we will perfume the theater with "Coty** etc. Diego Agueros & Co.60 ALLEN ST. 60 sells GENERAL rubbers, the queens of Puerto Rico. Advt " For Bedroom and Dining Room Furniture, "EL CIELO" Allen No. 25. San Juan, P. R. FOR SALE. Two-storey house on Condado Street, corner Ribot Madera and concrete. They will inform in the same. SOCIETY-BRAND What will it be? IN "THE GLORY" I
bre Wilson, waved his top hat, looked slowly at the audience and thanked them effusively. On arriving at the Cemetery President Harding delivered a most heartfelt speech, which was heard at the same time in New York and San Francisco. He said that he spoke at this time not as a pacifist who feared war, but as a man who, above all, loved justice and hated destruction: "There must be and will be now," he added, "the supreme voice of a conscious civilization demanding of the world the termination of war and, therefore, the reduction of armaments; and that is precisely the ideal which must prevail in the disarmament conferences which will begin tomorrow. * BEBEN GUER'S CAMPAIGN PLAN HAS BEEN APPROVED MADRID, November 11.-The Council of Ministers which has just been held has carefully studied the plan of campaign presented by the Resident Commissioner in Morocco, General Beren Gner, finding it to be most appropriate and convincing. Victory Garden" TODAY. - SATURDAY 12. - TODAY. Second performance of the applauded artist who received a standing ovation last night in his debut, Gran Frégolino Todo Nuevo. Amphitheater 50. Lunettes 25.
Germany conquers a huge commercial market IN FRANCE BELIEVES ALEMA NIA WINS IN THE COMMERCIAL WAR (From the New York Press). PARIS, Oct. 31.-The marvelous commercial and industrial progress of Germany, since the end of the war, is a cause of deep concern to France. This nation fears that it will not be able to compete with German merchants in the different markets of the world. Although the German government hides its industrial and financial resources at present with the same care with which it guarded its military information during the war, the statistical figures corresponding to exports and imports, made public in other countries, reveal the enormous industrial progress of Germany. The German invasion of foreign markets is the greatest proof of the undoubted revival of the country. Ho lauda has purchased German merchandise* worth $354,400,393 in 1920 Gentlemen Owners of FORD Royal Cord Rubbers 30 x 3 1¡2 . The U. S- Tire Co. did not want to put on the market a Royal Cord 30 x 3 1'2 Clincher rubber, for* Ford and other cars, because to date Cord rubbers in that size and flange type were not giving satisfactory results. After many tests, the U. S. now brings to the market the ROYAL CORD rubber in size 30 x 3 1|2 Clincher. This famous rubber can be obtained in our different warehouses in the Island and this capital, or directly from our establishment PIRETRANTONI & SOJO "La Tienda de Goma". San Juan, P. R. Buttons are plied and lined. A. CARAZO, Bran St 72. jPROTEX? -H-Hri-H- '!■ !■ !■ <■ f! -I- { 4 f ■! ■>
In view of this favorable decision, General Berenguer intends immediately to make a great military advance in accordance with the above-mentioned plans. I WASHINGTON, November 11.-At the session held today by the Projects Board which forms part of the Disarmament Con ferences, it was agreed that matters relating to the Far East and especially to Japan would be given first consideration. As this problem is considered the most delicate of all those to be discussed at the Conferences, the government is determined to push it forward and tackle it, considering its solution as an indispensable means to achieve disarmament. The President of the Republic Pilsudski has insisted on irrevocably resigning his office unless the plan for the division of Lithuania is accepted by the Sejm. The Polish government has submitted this question to the League of Nations, in order that it may be settled in conformity with the interests of the nation, which it considers endangered. sending instead, only $166, 978, 264 in sundries and leaving a profit to German exporters. of $237,426,129. Denmark and Italy are making considerable purchases also from Germany and German firms are gaining an enormous clientele in South Africa, South America and Japan. In England, Spain and Argentina, they have already won important orders, offering prices extraordinarily lower than those of foreign rival firms. German quotations are only possible because of the enormously low wages and salaries and the tremendous depreciation of the mark. The workers of the rival countries with (Contlnued on p. 6). "Rialto" Tomorrow Sunday Premiere in Puerto Rico Lucy Cotton starring in the great film "El Diablo'*, in the SPECIAL drama in 6 acts "THE PRODIGY WIFE" CURRENT PRICES.
SAVINO Has just received a large assortment of cashmere suits, the latest novelty, at very limited prices, and many other fine articles for gentlemen. San Francisco 52. San Juan. Advt. FOR WOODEN BEDS .AND MATTRESSES. ONLY "EL CIELO" San Juan. Alien No. 25. PEDROBO TYPEWRITER SERVICE 77 Alien. Phone 1225. We repair typewriters, adding and calculating machines, mimeographs, phonographs and the like. Hudson 7 pas. mod. 1919 for sale. Small car is taken on account. Address Angel Garcíq, Central Vannina, Río Piedras.
Ulster has absolutely refused to relinquish its rights.
(From our correspondent at N. Y.) VIA "ALL AMERICA CABLES'' LONDON, Nov. 11.-The pending question between the Government and Ireland has lately taken on a more serious aspect in consequence of the note which the Cabinet has just received from Ulster, refusing to accede to the pro-positions submitted to it by Lloyd George as a basis for settling the Irish dispute. Ulster, in the note addressed to England, refuses to yield to its legitimate rights for the benefit of the Irish, thus maintaining the attitude which it has always maintained towards the Irish problem. The above reply has caused great disquiet in the government whose efforts have so far proved completely futile. / THE DEFEARME CONFERENCE WILL BEGIN TOMORROW AT 10.30 A. M. WASHINGTON, Nov. M. WASHINGTON, November 11.- The government has arranged for the opening of the disarmament conferences to take place at ten-thirty o'clock, before noon. The grand ceremony will be held in the Continental Memorial Hall. The order of the grand program will be as follows: First the invocation or religious ceremony of the act will be solemnly performed, according to the usual procedures for this type of act. Then President Harding will make a brief speech to explain the magnitude of the event, as well as to excite all the Delegates to be inspired by the high ideal on which the Conferences are based. Then the President of the American Delegation, Mr. Hughes, will suggest the procedure to be followed for the best organization and development of the work. A chairman will then be elected and will say a few brief words; and a chairman will be elected.
Great Britain sends a formidable squadron to the Pacific.
THE NEWS PRODUCES SENSATION IN WASHINGTON (From the New York Press). WASHINGTON, Oct. 31.- The subject under discussion today at the fourth formal session of the four American delegates concerned the strength and naval policy of the country. Secretary Hughes, who heads the delegation, recently studied this with Secretary of the Navy Denby and the naval surveyors, the results of which study were presented boy at the session. It was suggested that the news that Great Britain had decided to send an important part of its large fleet to the Pacific waters might also be discussed. Until a few months ago, the Imperial Japanese Navy had no parallel in the Pacific. While the American fleet was concentrated in the Atlantic, England was content that the Japanese, in accordance with its treaty, should remain alone in the Pacific. At the advent of Harding, the American fleet was divided and half of it, composed of the most powerful warships, was sent permanently to the Pacific. According to reports received. England has now decided to send her large ships to the Pacific as well, which has caused much speculation in Washing ton, since this is taking place on the eve of the arms limitation conference. In some circles it is taken as an indication that England does not intend to resume its efforts to disarm the United States, and that the General Secretary, who will have charge and direction of the Program and Procedures Committee, will be in charge of the Conference. This being concluded, the Disarmament Conference will recess until Tuesday the fifteenth at eleven o'clock in the morning.
Porto Rico Railway Light & Power Co. NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC In order to improve our electric streetcar service a new route will be put into effect as of next Sunday, the thirteenth of the current month. The Condado line trolley that currently stops at Borinquen Park will continue to stop 23, which will be from now on the final station of this service. Therefore, all persons residing on the Park Street or in its immediate vicinity must use the trolley with the "COUNTY" sign to travel in any direction. The Park line will be eliminated, but persons wishing to go to Borinquen Park who take the trolley between stops 10 and 23 will be entitled to a transfer ticket for the County trolley. Extra cars will be available during certain hours of the night and on Sundays and holidays from stop 10 to Borinquen Park to transport passengers going to our Park Cinema, without the need to transfer at stop 23. Passengers traveling from San Juan to the County or taking the County trolley at any stop before arriving at Borinquen Park will not be entitled to transfer. Only those passengers who took said trolley at the Park and subsequent stops will be entitled to a transfer ticket in either direction upon arrival at stop 23. In addition to the above transfer tickets, the present transfer system remains in effect. It is an essential requirement for the use of this privilege that the passenger request the transfer ticket when boarding the car, but no transfer ticket will be issued to any passenger who has paid for the fare with a transfer ticket. In other words, no passenger shall be entitled to more than one transfer ticket during the same trip. San Juan, P. R., November 9, 1921. Manuel V. DOMENECH. General Manager.