ELM0NDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year, $7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 - Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MARANA NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
8AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
ruoliuH and diaunbatad andar permit (ho. 801) aatnoriieé by ib. a o""t eecuoer d. 1017, on dio al tM t*u"" Uin" ot Ban Joan, Porto Bico. By order oí the Preaidant, á. 8. Bui Latvian. Poatmaater General Bntered aa eeoond ele", matter february 31, 1019, at the Poet Office'at Ban Juan, Porto Bl "o. United Btaiea of America under the Aet of march 8, 1879.
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 8, 1921.
NUMBER 814.
YEAR ll|
The horrible catastrophe of Oppau has no parallel in history.
MAGUNCIA, Germany, Sept. 27.-A great explosion has been recorded in the chemical factory of the "Badische Anilin Fabric Company" at Oppau, on the Rhine, which destroyed the town, and brought death and desolation to many homes. The number of dead is estimated at from one thousand to fifteen hundred, and the wounded at about two thousand. A report says, that at the time of the explosion, they were near the place, where they are believed to have perished. The unfortunate city of Oppau is the scene of the greatest desolation, as more than a third of its houses are completely destroyed and the rest are without roofs. There are also many dead and injured. The catastrophe is attributed to an excess of pressure in two gasometers near the city. Where the gasometers are located, there is a hole 130 yards wide by five yards deep. Within a radius of several hundred yards, not a single wall was left standing. The directors of the Company say that the explosion occurred in a warehouse where four thousand tons of nitro sulphate had been deposited, which had been examined internally and was believed to be free from explosion. All the workers' residences in the vicinity were reduced to dust. At Manheim, on the opposite bank of the river, thirty-five persons were seriously injured and two hundred more or less slightly. The news from Ludwigschffen, shows that three trains of workmen fell buried in the ruins, and that many children on their way to school in that town were injured. In the small cemetery near Oppau, there are already more than two hundred corpses on the grass. Numerous slabs were lifted by the force of the explosion and thrown in different directions. Within a radius of three miles, not a single window or door is still intact. French doctors are helping the wounded
French doctors are helping the wounded, aid has been sent from all the neighboring towns, and all public and private automobiles have been requisitioned. The roads leading from Oppau are materially occupied by curious onlookers on their way to the scene of such a tremendous disaster. A regiment of colonial infantry and the first regiment of Madagascar moved immediately from Ludwischaffen to preserve the area and assist in shadowing. An eyewitness of the catastrophe, says; ''I was on horseback near the factory, at half past seven in the morning, when suddenly I heard a strange rumbling noise. The earth seemed to tremble, and a few hundred yards away there was a great column of flame and smoke, immediately followed by an explosion which threw me into the air. When I was able to get to my feet, an immense column of smoke made the part of the factory where the gasometers were located disappear from my sight. All kinds of objects, stones, bricks, blocks, etc., then rained down on the road. "Hearing screams behind me, I turned around and imagined that the village of Oppau had been destroyed by an earthquake. Soon after, the main buildings of the factory began to burn and the air was filled with smoke and a pungent smell of ammonia. Twenty minutes later, another explosion was heard, but less violent. "The alarm was immediately raised, and within half an hour after the first explosion, help arrived. Unfortunately, as further explosions were feared, it was not possible to start work before nine o'clock in the morning." The note supplied by the Administration of the Oppau factory, said the explosion occurred in a warehouse, or "- contained two hundred tons of ammonium sulphate. It adds that every precaution was taken during the manufacturing and storage of the product to make an explosion impossible.
New triumph for Felix Lopez
The excellent and reputable jewelry shop of Don Félix López, a cultured and distinguished gentleman, located on Salvador Brau Street, near the main square, which is the center of the town's ne gocios, has acquired greater splendor and magnificence in recent days, having been extended to the beautiful and spacious adjoining premises, which were occupied by Don Damián Rodriquez. The two stores, which will also be two of the most beautiful and spacious establishments of Juan, will communicate in the future, which has the advantage of giving facilities and comfort to the clientele, which is more numerous every day. The previous premises were too small to contain the select and distinguished public, especially ladies, who gathered there, which forced the gentlemanly owner, Don Felix Lopez, to decide to acquire the adjoining premises, for greater facilities for customers, who are served by beautiful ladies and excellent employees, whose hallmarks are Ja courtesy and affability.
He quickly became known as an active and enterprising man. All this makes it useless that we return to emphasize that the jewelry store of Mr. Lopez counts on the favor of the immense majority of the public, especially the most aristocratic and distinguished public of the island, because during five years he has been able to capture the confidence of him, by his exquisite education, refined culture and never disdained affability. When we visited the splendid jewelry store, on the occasion of its new expansion, we have been able to appreciate although ' numerous public did not let us see anything, that there are there merchandise for all the tastes of the clientele, bigger each time, and that in all the garments in general has been made a reduction of fifty percent, in order to put the tastes and the aspirations of the public at the level of the present economic situation. There we also saw numerous boxes of garments, of all kinds and value, especially fine garments, pric-
aittimiunu. On the other hand, the progress that the business was obtaining, impe* riosamente demanded the acquisition of the new premises, which must be as crowded as the other, because the prices of all jewelry and luxury novelties and the most demanding fashion, which are exhibited there, are very limited, because Don Felix Lopez has had the enviable quality of making all their purchases * in cash, which provides indisputable advantages, which are also for its customers. Don Felix Lope", as the public knows, was established five years ago, in the street of Salvador Brau, although it was andh advantageously known since it began to constitute which is, today very select and numerous clientele, eji the street of San" José number 23, in whose establishment gave to BUY cheap in "La Gloria" Fortaleza, esq. San Justo. V. ARRIVI CO. S. en C.
The new store, which will soon contain the best and most beautiful of the jewelry raido, has been received by Mr. Lopez by the last mail. And to crown the triumph acquired so far, Don Felix Lopez, the affable and gentlemanly owner, will soon embark for the United States and Europe, from where he will import the most attractive and surprising of the branch, with the purpose that the most select families of Puerto Rico can present their relatives and friends, in the next Easter and New Year, with gifts of indisputable art, beauty and positive value, which will powerfully attract the attention of the public. We are pleased to - licitate the distinguished businessman for the enormous successes obtained by him, at the same time that we wish him to resume his triumphs, which he deserves for his affability and his kindnesses, at no time disavowed. He plies and lines buttons. A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advfc.
Enormous efforts to capture German rebels.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) LEPZIG, Oct. 7.-The German government has resumed its efforts to capture the chiefs of the Knapp revolution, who since 1920 have evaded all inquiries made by the Berlin government to imprison them. The German Commissioner in the Rhine Provinces has thanked the Bavarian Government and the Palatinate for the effective assistance rendered by the French in connection with the horrendous catastrophe at Oppau. - 1 J I THE GREEKS BEAT A COMPLETE RETREAT - ! PARIS, October 7. - A dispatch from Constantinople says that the destruction of the city by the Greeks has continued, and that the Greeks are in full retreat, being closely pursued by the Turks. LONDON, Oct. 7.-A dispatch from Athens to the 'Central News' says that reports from the battle front announce that large contingents of Turkish infantry and cavalry, operating in the vicinity of Eskirchier, were dispersed by a counter-attack of the Greeks. The Nationalists left in the hands of the Hellenes a large number of prisoners and suffered numerous losses. The war material taken by the troops of King Constantine is enormous. BRILLIANT VELADA IN AGUADILLA (By telegraph) Aguadilla, October. EL MUNDO, San Juan. The "Club Betances" obituary evening was a worthy success in memory of the patriot Barbosa. Participants included Pérez, Matos, Cerezo and Valdejuly, whose moving speech brought tears to the eyes. To Feliciano GERENA. THE PRO-AMERICAN DEMONSTRATION WAS TO BE HELD ON THE 12th OF THE CURRENT DAY Yesterday afternoon we had the pleasure of receiving a visit from the Executive Committee of the pro-American demonstration that is planned to be held in San Juan, with the purpose of announcing that, in spite of what was discussed at the meeting held on Wednesday in the municipality, said Committee has decided to hold the referred civic act on the twelfth of the current day. The sympathizers of the plausible idea are informed by means of these lines of the expressed resolution in order that they concur to the pro-American demonstration that on the 12th of the present day will be held in the city of San Juan.
SHIRTS OF SUPERIOR QUALITY, infinite number of paints and beautiful colors, and in all "sizes. They are worth twice as much. AproZrlzzz.l.OO very fine quality madras shirts, strong, suitable for everyday wear, beautiful assortment in colors, guaranteed paints. They are worth much more we sell them .... n AA now at ¿eVVV
"Cine Puerto Rico" TODAY -SABADO- TODAY The sensational production, of great " plot Origin of Humanity AND A COMEDY.
The Governor has advocated statehood in all his speeches around the island.
Don Manuel Gonzalez offered the Doberuadon the land for the leper colony Our editor, Mr. Vargas, sent us the following telegram from Ponce, regarding the arrival of the Governor: I - Ponce, October 7. i EL MUNDO, San Juan. In Juana Diaz, enthusiastic reception. Numerous automobiles and carriages with Ponce commissions were awaiting retinue. Extraordinary Ponce reception. Governor spoke Mayor's office. Numerous group of students paraded Puerto Rican flag in crowd. Splendid banquet "Hotel Francés", all parties. Transcendental confe rence last night Coate o between Don Manuel González and Governor. The former offered to give land for a leper colony. Mr. Reily has advocated this in almost every speech. VARGAS. Regarding the same matter, our correspondent in Ponce, Mr. Mócete Padilla, transmits us this other telegram: Ponce, October 7, 1921. Mr. Director of EL MUNDO, San Juan . At a quarter past eleven the Governor entered accompanied by a royal retinue. Socialist Republicans made great efforts to gather the turnout. Popular element and all municipal employees, school children, firemen, national guard and other elements formed the I recibynieato. Unionist Party took no part in any of these acts. Speech Governor is taken in this city as propaganda re publicana. In moments great Puerto Rican flag passed in front, he said that that lone star flag would form part forty-eight state of the national flag; that the two hundred propagandists Puerto Rican flag, and independence seek public jobs; and that there are two or three independent generals without army, as the dejnás left the country knowing that the people would not be fooled anymore. That he would consult with Tous Soto, Iglesias and José Torres every time he tried to make appointments. At twelve o'clock he left the Hotel Francés to attend a lunch. This afternoon a conference was held at the high school. Club Deportivo, and Casino celebrate festivals. Tomorrow they leave Mayagüez. ANOTHER TELEGRAM FROM PONCE Last night we received from our editor Mr. Vargas another telegram that reads as follows:
Ponce, October 7, 1921. EL MUNDO, San Juan. Unable to get telephone line. Tonight great "Meliá" banquet. Reception this afternoon high school. Huyke gave speech expounding ideas. He pleaded for children to be inspired.
The victims of the Pia.'.tfti Tiena fire should be taken care of.
Yesterday again visited our Newsroom numerous families of the 106 residing in the tents which are situated at stop 8. The state they were in was truly deplorable, due to the llrfvia. According to what we were told, it is impossible to live any longer in the tents, as the canvas is completely torn, and the one that is not torn, is a sieve. | They say that they have visited the Economic Commission and that there they have been told that nothing can be done by that body, since everything depends on the Auditor. We were also told that the Legislature had passed a bill for $125,000, for houses to be built in the slum for the victims of the fire at Puerta de. Tjerra, to be put into effect immediately, which has not been accomplished. Another of those who visited our Re rtaction, who was also a member of the Commission, told us that there are 64 unoccupied houses in the workers' slum. We believe that the government should proceed immediately, since it is impossible for those 106 families to continue living there as they have been doing up to now, under water and sun, exposed to the risk of contracting diseases. JUDGE TORRES CORDOVA DENOUNCED TO THE GOVERNOR In Ponce it was said lately that Judge Torres Cordova had resigned from his post, as a result of certain communications between him and the Governor, about the former refusing to give a search warrant requested by some detectives from San Juan. - Judge Torres Cordova, according to reports, has said that it was certain that the aforementioned detectives were able to obtain such a warrant, which he did not issue because the applicants did not meet the necessary requirements. In view of the Judge's well-founded refusal, the detectives notified Governor 1 of the decision of the aforementioned official, and Mr. Reily, by telegraph, asked the Judge to explain his attitude. Judge Torres Cordova did so, and the incident was terminated, favorably for the Judge. THE RESULT OF THE "SOCIETY OF NATIONS" PARIS, October 7.- A dispatch from Geneva says that in the keynote address delivered by M. Karnemenck, President of the "Society of Nations", he assured that the most important work accomplished by the Society has been the close friendship which unites the nations represented in the said body. a sincere Americanism. Toas Soto also spoke. After banquet "MéI liá", royal ball Club Deportivo. VARGAS.
As we announced opportunely on, Thursday afternoon held its first regular session the new Insular Board of Health. Mr. Juan Morales Diaz, stenographer of the same, was entrusted by the Secretary, Dt. Lugo Viña, to provide this information, which he did gladly. After the members of the Board took office, Dr. Lippit was unanimously elected president, and Dr. Lugo Viña was re-elected secretary. Dr. Ledo. Marquez Roig was appointed Treasurer of the private funds of the Sanatorio Insular. The Secretary read the following letter from Dr. F. del Valle Atiles, who is in New York: "New York, September 22, 1921.  The ::: 'I persons who wish to choose- " " " ger in time for their plot, may pass through the street of the -' ? Sol No. 14, after t 5 o'clock in the afternoon. " t Pedro Moczó BANIET, Phone 316. ?
The Board of Health to Caguas
Governor, through the Bureau of Insular Affairs, my resignation as mleni bro of that Board, which had honored me with the presidency. It was my intention to communicate to the Board within the next month, my resolution to remain here one year longer, and therefore to tender my resignation, as I considered too long the unlimited leave of absence with which you had shown me your good will, for which I will thank you as long as I live. The Governor's suggestion to tender the resignation in the form I have done, I have estimated as a desire to act quickly, perhaps by using the cable, and this will explain to the Board why I have not tendered n (Continued on p. 4.) "Rialto" Today- Saturday Grand Performance-Today Premiere in Puerto Rico The ingenue comedienne "Constance Talmadge'' in the very pretty comedy "THE PERFECT WOMAN." CURRENT PRICES Tomorrow-Sunday Audience favorite '"Wallace Reid" in the beautiful production "QUE PRISA TIENES".
Special Sale of Shirts SHIRTS fine silk shirts of Fa best quality, all sizes in beautiful colors and at lists, there is a great variety to choose from; worth double q qq, now at ...J ,3.0/0 Fancy straw HATS. Fine caps, ties, 'silk and washable, socks, collars. Underwear of all kinds; -bathrobes. All at situation price- GONZALEZ PADIN 60. SAN JUAN - PONCE - MAYAGÜEZ
WOOD Builders: I have in port Ia*g8leta "Rassapeage" with a cargo of woods of all kinds. Send me your orders to Dock No. 6. F. Benítez Rexach
Pure Madras SHIRTS the best for work. We have a great variety of colors in all sizes. They are worth much more, but we wish to liquidate them and give them 50 fine SHIRTS of different kinds, of fancy fabrics, beautiful colors and 'at lists, in all' sizes, are worth, the least, $5 and we offer them for little .... Q n/t time at 3.vv
"Teatro America" Tonight Success "THE DOUBLE ADVENTURE" 'by Charles Hutchinson and "SLEEP NENA" by Chato Tomorrow "'OH BOY" by Hale and June Caprice ® CURRENT PRICES.
Japanese militarism begins its opposition to the disarmament plan
TOKYO, September 29.- The necessity of recognizing particular positions of particular nations in all discussions on disarmament was stressed today by Lieutenant General Hanzo Yamanashi, Japan's Minister of War, in an exclusive interview for the International News Service. The general began by calling attention to his belief that U.S. President Harding and Secretary of State Hughes had called the Washington conference with the utmost sincerity, but that they' had advanced several points which in his view would make it difficult to settle all disarmament questions at the meeting. "The defense of nations-he said-must be recognized as entitled to special consideration. Particular nations and for that reason defense cannot be based upon population, coastline, wealth or upon any of these points in the abstract. "The disarmament conference at Wash ington will find it difficult to settle all these questions at one meeting. General points may be considered at the Washington coference, but details, matters affecting particular nations and relating to the present reduction of armies and the like. will be difficult to be settled at this first meeting. It is entirely possible that a later meeting may be held and then the indi vidual problems of affected nations, parts of the world in particular, may be considered. "For example, Germany will be absent from the conference table. If it is said, for example, that France must reduce her large armies under arms, she will probably say that "there is a threat from Germany". Similar threats to France from Germany may arise in other parts of the world. If the nations of the world are willing to give France certain guarantees against invasion by Germany, she can then partly disarm. Similar disarmament may be carried out elsewhere.
France maintains an army on the Spanish border. Suppose that after the conference both nations decide, in agreement with the powers represented at Washington, to reduce the troops guarding their frontiers. That would be the real disarmament, but it would be carried out by the powers most vitally affected, the others simply approving or disapproving the measure. "There is the possibility that a country which we will call A. may reduce its armies to 200,000 men, for example. Country B. agrees to this reduction and also limits its armies to 200,000. War ensues and country B. can gain country C. as an ally, thus adding 300,000 men to the forces of E. What would country A. do in this eventuality? "In beginning plans for disarmament," concluded the general, "we must begin with the minimum army which a nation believes it can sustain, considering any possible emergency it may confront. Consider the question of development in that light. It is possible that the Washington conference may succeed, and I entertain great hopes that it may. I introduce these questions simply by way of mentioning that the Washington meeting, after studying the general issues, may be continued at subsequent conferences, perhaps in Washington, perhaps in other sections of the world, but subsequent meetings at which the actual terms of disarmament will be presented? Intelligence men I believe ' today support this disarmament all over the world." SUGAR CABLES The latest news received in San Juan, reports that sales have been made of sugar from the next harvest of Puerto Rico, at the same price that for the same time Cuba sells.
THE STEAM VESSEL "ATRATO" accepts cargo for all the ports of the Island. At dock No. 2, it is receiving it continuously. The next departure will be on Thursday 13th. For information: "P R. ROGERS & CO. TELEPHONE 1084. SAN JUAN.