ELAWJNDO
- . ipm 8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One afio¿7.5O
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
DAILY MORNING PAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
by th. Aet of oetotar 6, 1817, on SI. st tks Prat Offle. of 8aa Jus. Porto Rieo. By order of th. President, A- 8. Bur leson, Poetmaetor GanaraL Entered m eoeond eUee matter, fobrnary 91. 1818. at the Poet Offlec at San Jnan. Porto Ri eo. United Stat- of Ameriea under the Act of march 8, 1879.
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 1921.
ARO III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
NUMBER 607.
OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMISSIONER OF INSULAR HEALTH.
KCESMI1U CNSTRIICCIOE III MOOERRO BUILDING
Dr. Bull Solar, Commissioner of Health of Puerto Rico, in a recently held interview, informed a reporter of EL MUNDO about the recommendations he made a few days ago to the Governor on the occasion of the message that this high official will submit to the consideration of the Legislators in their next session. Our readers are already familiar with Dr. Bula Soler's de. clarifications concerning the Asylum. He is of the opinion that it is very urgent the construction of another building that will bring, in harmony with the latest principles of science, all the necessary and indispensable measures. But this is not the only question submitted by the Commissioner of Health in his memorandum. Others of such importance have also been dealt with by him. -In the fight for the control of tuberculosis, which threatens to spread more and more, preying with predilection on the poorest and most susceptible cias because of their conditions which favor the development of the disease, three factors are indispensable: the Sanatorium to treat the incipient, curable cases; the hospital to isolate the advanced or chronic cases; and the dispensary, with its visiting nurses, to care for those patients who for one reason or another remain at home.*' -¿ 7 -This necessity has constituted the main oblative of the campaign which -the Department ¿of Health has been carrying on, every day more actively - intense, especially in the last two * ata*. r ~ -t -statistics of that terrible enteataq lives tarthfré to. tas the afios os more than sufficient to demortri" "¡te. cpalquier effort that hajnfaoa to subdue the plague, no matter what its magnitude, will be justified. "Yúáse: 19)0.11, there were 2,518 deaths from tubercle ata; 1,864 in 1911-12; 1,719 in 1912-13; 1,507 in 1913 to 1914; 1,924 in 1914-15; 2,274 in 191>10; 2,579 in 1916-17; two thousand five hundred and five in 1917.18; 2,674 in 1918-19; and 2,545 in 1920-21. The campaign was initiated in the middle of 1917, when, due to the provisions of the new Charter, the subsidy that the Anti-Tuberculosis League of San Juan received for the maintenance of the notorious clinic, which was then established in Seboruco, was suppressed and the Department of Health took direct charge of the care of the "formes". At the same time, the construction of the Las Casas building was underway in the area and the authorities demanded the transfer of the Sanatorium to another site. -It was decided to temporarily isolate, in the meantime, the patients at the Eos-
pital Cuarentenario de la Marina. After many difficulties, the Department obtained a piece of land, located in the Monacillos neighborhood, in the municipality of Río Piedras, consisting of 107 acres, a splendid site, of singular beauty, high, with free flow of pure air and pleasant climate, thanks to the generosity of the noble philanthropist Don Pedro Arzuaga y Peraza, who donated this property to the Town of Puerto Bico -¿ 7 - The Sanatorium was only a project that was beginning to be developed today, thanks to the philanthropy of the Puerto Rican people who have given their support without distinction of geographic class, and also thanks to the generosity of the people of Puerto Piedras. Today, thanks to the philanthropy of the Puerto Rican people, who have generously donated their support without distinction of class, and thanks also to the noblest help of the Legislature, it is an institution whose beneficial results are already being felt. -At the rate it is going, in a not too long time it will be finished and it will be, for the honor of the country that has responded with so much love, one of the best works of its kind, none will equal it in the Antilles. ~When the first huts were finished, on December 25, nineteen hundred and nineteen nine, ten and nine patients who were, as I have indicated, provisionally housed in the Hospital Cuarentenario de la Marina, were transferred to Rio Piedras. As we have had larger premises, the number of patients admitted has increased. At present, fifty-five patients are under treatment at the Sanatorium. I believe that the greater the number of victims that can be received and treated at the Sanitarium, the greater will be the success of the campaign against the terrible White Plague. That is why I devote so much attention to those works. But it is necessary to have sufficient resources to finish them as soon as possible and to support and treat as many patients as the capacity of the Sanatorium will allow. -¿ ? -Four to five hundred patients will then be able to be cared for. That will be a real city, the City of Hope. It will have its squares and avenues, with its magnificent and splendid gardens. It will have its library and its school for the children. Precisely in these last days this last building is being finished, donated by the Youth Red Cross of Puerto Bico. Today it already has electricity and water supply installations. There will be chapels for religious services and buildings for legal entertainment. -(Continued on page 34).
y CABRERA A ¿mavaoubz,aguadilla - Mayagüez, P. R., r SÁM JUAN, P. Rj. February, 1921 TO OUR RELATIVES ON THE ISLAND: We are pleased to inform you that we have been appointed General Agents for Puerto Rico, of the well known English Fire Insurance Company, THE YORKSHIRE INSURANCE COMPANY, Ltd. of London, < ■ ■ ■ ■ . ■ f and we are pleased to place ourselves at your orders in this new Department, both for fire insurance t which we have already established, and for *' Maritime and other kinds of insurance, which we establish*. run mts later. . ► F. CARRERA 4 Bro. 1 OTteUU ffiOVISXOKAL: _ . te Crilrt/teteffi M90,7ÍV.BOX350 , s"- ■ P. R. Advt.
WASHINGTON, Feb. 4.-The last sessions of Congress have been very important, for they have dealt' with the momentous problems which will have to be solved to secure the political and military future of the nation. The question of disarmament, which is of so much concern to the Heads of European Governments, was extensively discussed. Substantial appropriations were made for the army and navy. WASHINGTON, February 4.- In view of the recent debates in Congress on disarmament the GraL Persh ing has sent to the Naval Commission a notice "n "1 which emphasizes the pacifist tendency, as well as, the attempt to abandon the Manne s of pronantion, an idea which seems to possess the spirit of the people of the naddn. | As long as all the great Powers of the world," says the General's report, "do not consent to and put into practice the policy of the deeanno, it is unwise and unwise for the United States to abandon the construction of the bátete and the preparation of the army," he said.- B1 government bolgulle decided to engage negodado loo Bstadoe Ubidoe, Brazil and Rfungak, so that cetas nadones aoep ten.jNMbil js manufacturades in Búk f W éamblo de santerias priawe and teEjMlgfca have soMdo te the factories of tajidM and products of "tocMn" puse have toatido "te reta-
"All tendency toward pacifism must be forgotten," says Gen. Pershing.
The Belgian delegates have left for Rio de Janeiro, Washington and Bucharest in order to achieve the above-mentioned purpose. - l PARIS, February L- No official information has been received by the Government of the Republic concerning the conditions of government compensation adopted by the Supreme Council during the past week. It is said, however, in the official circuits, that if the notices given are accurate, and that the German Foreign Minister Simmons has said that he will not accept the terms of the compensation, he will not accept the terms of the compensation.aetos "El Diario delárbara" Tardo: Prices Corrteotee Moche: 35 and 20 cents Mañana TMyghigu Por la matea - CONSUELO MmMDIA PRICES 25 and "¿teotavM
The fact that the Allied Governments consider the agreements adopted during the past week by the Supreme Council as mere details concerning the execution of the Treaty will not change the attitude of the Allied Governments, who consider the agreements adopted during the past week by the Supreme Council as mere details concerning the execution of the Treaty. In official circles it is announced that Germany may refuse to execute the clauses of the Treaty, but she will not be allowed to say on what basis she will or will not want to execute what has been agreed, since all discussion will fall on the document on which the representatives authorized by Germany affixed their signatures. If the former Empire wishes to present objections, these will be examined, but if it refuses to comply with what has been agreed, the Allies will notify the Government of Berlin of the four penalties agreed upon in Paris. # In view of Germany's protests, the leading Parisian newspaper "Le Tempe" suggests to the Allied governments the adoption of the following measures in the event of Germany's non-compliance: The Allies will immediately occupy the German customs offices on the left bank of the Berlin. The Allies will establish customs posts in these zones which will distinguish the occupied from the unoccupied territories, 3. The representatives of the Allied governments will meet immediately to establish a customs administration.
Laws, which when extended to P,.R" will benefit Agriculture and Industry.
IMPORTANT REMARKS BY DON ANTONIO R. RARCELO ON THE ECONOMIC FUTURE OF PUERTO RICO
Since Mr. Barceló did not have time to explain certain non-political matters in his speech at the Palace Hotel, given the late hour of the night in which he had to close the event, we requested an interview with him, which was granted, in order to be able to give our readers information about his economic efforts in Washington. In his office in the Senate he kindly received us, and using his good disposition, we began our task -Tell me, Mr. Barceló, what is the temperament of the congressmen of the United States with respect to the economic affairs of Puerto Bico? -I can assure you that the men in Congress with whom I have spoken have shown a certain spirit favorable to the economic interests of our country. At least Mr. Cordova Davila and I, in making our in- formations, have observed very good will in several of those men, and most particularly in Judge Towner, Chairman of the Insular Affairs Committee, who is a good friend of Puerto Rico. I believe that this good will will reveal itself in the end in the tariffs, on the protection of which the life of our sugar industry and the production of tobacco and coffee depend. -Did you join to your political steps some others of an economic nature in relation to the needs of the country?
-Yes, sir, I effectively participated, together with Mr. Tjórdova Dávila, in the law that he presented to extend to Puerto Rico, with some amendments, the federal agricultural loan law, enacted for the United States in July of nineteen hundred and ten six. This law divides the continental part of the United States, excluding Alaska, into twelve districts, and creates in each one a "Federal Territorial Bank," which will be chartered by the United States. Federal Territorial Bank" to meet the agricultural loan needs of that country on a preferential basis. The loans are not more than ten rail dollars nor less than one hundred dollars for first mortgages, and the interest rates are more than six percent federal. The organization of this law is extensive; but it is sufficient to know that in applying it to Puerto Rico some of its complicated procedures have been very tactfully eliminated, and a branch bank is established on the island under the jurisdiction of the Federal Agricultural Bureau at Springfield, Massachusetts, which will make loans directly to the farmers at a rate imposed at a rate which may be one and one-half per cent in the United States, and which may be one and one-half per cent in the United States. The borrower shall be required to take stock therein in the amount of five per cent. of the amount of his loan, the stock being retained in the bank as collateral security; but with participation in all the bonds, until extinguished, in the amount of the amount of his loan.
1 debts, until the debt is extinguished, at which time the shares will be cancelled and paid at par. 1 - Do you believe that this law applies to Puerto Rico? i -Yes, I do. The law presented by : Córdova Dávila is in the Senate, with a favorable report from the Executive Committee, awaiting discussion and approval, and I am almost certain that it will become a law at any moment, as happened with the one which increased our credit margin from seven to ten per cent. -Will that law save the situation of the Farmers of Puerto Rico? -No. This law does not cover the sugar centralists, but will favor the small and medium farmers, who are the ones whose areas have been compromised and who feel the greatest need of momentary help. Undoubtedly, the acquisition of large term loans at short interest rates will allow many of them to free up their mortgaged farms, and at the same time will provide them with easier and less costly means to refurbish their crops, and at the same time, it will help the coffee growers, who are the historical victims of the refurbishing transactions, and in whose hands is the most scattered agricultural wealth. In a word, the tobacco growers, and in general all small farmers, will receive a positive benefit which will redeem them from the economic slavery which today burdens them. i -And do you not think that these farmers should strive to save their (Continued on 1" p. 3)
For Carnival Shop early and pick out the best looking costumes and dance outings. 1 t Latest new styles and great newness. g P. Schira & Co.
LOW CONSUMPTION OF SUGAR IN E. 0. CAUSES A LOW SUGAR SUPPLY.
WHAT MR. AROY RENITEZ HAS TO SAY ABOUT THE SITUATION.
He has returned from the United States, after having visited Cuba, ■ the well-known financier and esteemed friend of ours, Don Ramón Aboy Benitez, who because of his many business dealings both in the aforementioned countries and on the island, is a great connoisseur of the difficult situation now facing all industries and businesses. Don Ramon, whom we spoke to yesterday in his office at the Union Commercial, provided a reporter with important details about all of these current issues. -i- ? During the days that I remained in Havana I had occasion to study the economic situation of that country, in all its aspects, and I formed the following judgment: That the situation of the three main national Banks in Havana is so precarious that they will necessarily have to go into liquidation, due to the fact that their securities in portfolio are not realizable at the moment and are difficult to liquidate: Commerce in general, with a few exceptions, is in good condition and has sufficient resources for the normal conduct of its business; For although it is true that they have suffered enormous losses as a result of the fall in consumer goods, it is no less true that they had great profits during the period of the war, finding themselves now facing an embarrassing situation which we might call transitory, due to the fact that when they needed an article, they ordered it from three or four houses at the same time, and these - orders which in normal times were attended to by the caaas (nanufactiqprafc with great delays, This has been the cause of finding stocks on a larger scale than normal and the docks of Havana extremely congested, the most plausible thing in this case being that all Cuban commerce, with rare exceptions, has faced the situation, demonstrating the greatest good sense and sanity, without having to resort to the refusal, always annoying, of the non-acceptance of these orders for merchandise. All that has been said in the Press concerning the congestion at the Havana docks is pale in the face of reality, for it has been the case that goods that were shipped from New York four months ago, while I was in Havana I have seen the steamships beginning to unload for days. This situation, in my opinion is due rather than to the announced crisis, to the fact that there was a Customs Administrator in Havana supported by the Minister of Finance, who instead of facilitating, hindered the regular operation of the docks; and this is corroborated by the fact that the Government had to intervene by removing this Administrator from his post and appointing a special employee, who, surely, within four weeks will have the docks in a normal condition, since his activity at the present time is ponderable. TODAY SATURDAY FEBRUARY FIVE During the day will be obse> quired all ladies attending our establishment, with a small box of the rich powder "ARMAND" size for the hand bag. - Do not fail to come. - GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC. DO YOU SUFFER FROM TAPEWORM? I Well, in less than an hour, without E need for purgatives or any ■ diet, it will be extracted (with ea. | beza and all) by the famed spice- ■ list Dr. Raldiris. 22, "Carre- I tera" St, Cataño. I Se plisa y forran botones. A CARAZO, Brau Sü 72. Advt i
I -¿ ? -With regard to the sugar harvest in Cuba, I will tell you that the impressions before were that it would reach 4 million tons (and in reality there is enough cane for that), although it will be reduced to three million, for the following reasons: First: To the readjustment of wages, because there are a large number of braceros who have not wanted to accept the reduction that has been made to them. Due to this circumstance, the Central Mills are working at half of their capacity, and the most, at two-thirds of their capacity. Second: The drop in sucrose, which reduces the yield from half to one percent in sugar, in relation to that obtained in the last harvest for this same date. This fact has also contributed to the fact that the sugar mills are not working at full capacity. Third: At present there are about one third of the Cuban mills that have not yet started milling, due to the fact that their machinery is not in satisfactory condition. -This is a very difficult point for a categorical answer, due to the demoralization in the market of these last months. I shall confine myself to stating my impressions, which are based on facts that are available to everyone. No one is unaware that Europe, due to the lack of resources and the great depreciation of its currency, has extremely limited its consumption of aaújíaRf and also, it is ciecto that in > the United States itself, much less sugar than normal is consumed today; citing the example, to corroborate this, of the College of St. Joseph, New Jersey, which in times of war limited the sugar ration to girls, and continues today with the same rule, in spite of the abundance we now have of this sweet, it being logical to suppose that this same example will be followed by other Institutions and many families of the Metropolis. It is a general opinion that the consumption of sugar in the United States during the year 1920 has been the highest, and apparently this assertion is true; But in fact, what happened was that, due to the progressive rise in the price of sugar, not only the institutions and speculators, but also the factories, hoarded large quantities of sugar to defend themselves against the rise in prices, and then, when the fall began, these same sugars competed with the refiners (many of whom lost large sums of money), thus causing the demoralization that prevails today in the sugar market. In spite of the prevailing pessimism, I agree that if there is defense on the part of those interested in the sugar business, selling now only what is indispensable to cover their commitments until May or June; and if the one million ton decrease in Cuba's production is a fact, there will necessarily have to be a favorable reaction in sugar prices. Puerto Rico also has the protection of (Continued on page Buick Two Seat Buick Two Seat Car for sale, model D.45, perfect machine, good appearance and four new tires: will report G. M. Box 647. San Juan. **"■ THEATER "AMERICA" Today SABA DO-Grande* Acts cte Variadatas to 25 <♦" I unta. Lo" Modernists Cantos, Bailo*. Monologue", Diá ogo* and Mía* Ruth < tiffor-* "n "The Invisible Ray" Maftana Enid Riwttt "a >a . "P? Fortart íbo THE MODERNISTS Matinal and Matiaca, 1 r
TODAY SATURDAY FEBRUARY FIVE During the day will be obse> quired all ladies who concur to our establishment, with a little box of the rich powder "ARMAND" size for the hand bag. - Do not fail to come. - GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC.
DO YOU SUFFER FROM TAPEWORM? I Well, in less than an hour, with no E need for purgatives or diet ■ whatsoever, it will be extracted (ca. E beza and all) by the famed spice- ■ list Dr. Raldiris. 22, "Carre- E tera" St, Cataño. / I
It plisa and lining buttons. A CARAZO, Brau Sü 72. Advt.