THE BOTTOM
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81, Tal. 833 P, O. Box 345 [
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 A year,$7.50
MORNING PAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
OF HOW KERENSKY ESCAPED FROM LENWE'S CLUTCHES.
(From the New York Press) The employees of the State Department, United States, drawing back the veil of secrecy, have just given to the public the account of how Kerensky escaped death, and of the assistance rendered him by Sheldon Whitehouse, First Secretary of the United States Embassy in Petrograd, at the time of the coup d'etat of November, 1917. The Russian Winter Palace was surrounded by waves of Kerensky's troops, but he could not remain in the capital, because the assassination was imminent, a matter of a few hours. The official automobile of the American Embassy was passing through the palace square at a certain moment, one of the 'few that circulated, through the streets full of revolutionaries and carrying in the back of the car. The official American Embassy car was passing the palace square at a certain moment, one of the few that was driving through the streets full of revolutionaries and carrying the flag of the United States on the flagpole. Kgrensky and his friends, anxious, seeing the automobile, signaled to him. "The prime minister orders you to stand in front of the entrance to the pa" lacio. light! There was nothing to do but obey the Prime Minister's orders," was Whitehouse's explanation to the State Department. When the secretary had gone up to the Winter palace, Kerensky quickly made him aware of the danger he was running in Petrograd, with these words: "I have but an hour and a half to wait, for then the frontiers will be closed. My stay in Petrograd means execution." In a few minutes he put on a large fur hat and a thick overcoat, and left the gates of the Winter Palace, throwing himself confidently into the diplomat's car. All eyes in the square were fixed on him, eyes unfriendly to Kerensky, but resentful of the American diplomat. The car took off like a bullet. The Bolsheviks turned their attention back to the Winter Palace, waiting for the moment of events, that is, the assassination of Kerensky, in the same way as the extinction of the Czar and his family. Within an hour and a half, the frontiers were closed; but Kerensky was flying towards Luga, protected by the flag of the United States. For an hour the diplomat was waiting for his carriage at the Winter Palace, until he was taken away; he got into it and went through the rows of Bolshevik molehills, after having his passport examined. "THE ANCORA" INSURANCE COMPANY AGAINST PHYSICAL ACCIDENTS AND DEATH INCLUSIVE There is no better occasion or time than the present for you to take out a policy with which you will be provided for Accidents/Squidhtés:. p . Loss of Life, Paralysis, Loss of Arms or Eduardo GORBEAHotel Siglo XX, 44 Allen St., San Juan.
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
DEBS' FORGIVENESS DEPENDS ON HIMSELF
WASHINGTON, March 30. - It was learned today that the question whether the Socialist candidate for President of the United States, Eugene V. Debs, will be pardoned or not, depends on the candidate's assurances to the Attorney General of the United States, Daughty, that he will not devote his life to the propaganda of Bolshevism in the United States. This was the object of the summons made by the attorney general to the canon for a personal conference in Washington, a visit which caused a great sensation and was much commented upon, owing to the circumstance that Debs went to the Capitol without guards to guard him, on his sole word of honor that, when the conference was over, he would return to the Atlanta penitentiary, as indeed he did When it was made clear to the candidate that this was the price of his freedom, he made no reply. The question had taken him by surprise. The question led to a discussion of note between the attorney general and the Socialist candidate about the possibilities of the Bolshevik idea being received in the United States. The following statement is attributed to Debs. I would like to have some time to think about the proposal. It is known that no time was allotted to the prisoner to think about his final decision on the matter, and that the question of pardon is therefore left to the candidate's own resolution. Once Debs has made up his mind, the attorney general will send an emissary to the Atlanta penitentiary. | On the other hand, the attorney general has returned to his family from Columbus, and may spend the next few days studying Debs' case, as he said before leaving that he was not prepared to make any recommendations in the matter. LAST SUGAR CABLE. "Cuba sales at 4.81 cost and freight." This is equivalent to 5-82 those of Puerto Rico. There has been a drop of 6 cents in the last 48 hoursI TODAY. -Puerto Rico Premiere The film taken from the Inauguration of Harding the new President of the U.S.A. We will also show The Cook of the Forest drama in five acts by GEORGE BEBAN Monroe Salisbury Price Currents
NOTICE We notify all concerned that it has not been possible for us to reach agreement with the Workers' Committee in regard to the 'Take to divide the work equally among the operatives formerly working in those departments where there were overstaffed. The representatives of the workers' representatives forcibly suspended all work in the departments they had started to work in, which is completely contrary to what was agreed upon and nullifies the agreement signed last year. We are prepared to give work to about half of the personnel who previously worked in our factories, PAYING THE SAME PREVIOUS WAGES AND GUARANTEEING THEM CONSTANT WORK AT THE SAME TIME, and we instruct all the workers who wish to work in our factories to go directly to the Managers of the different factories, who are authorized to open the workshops whenever a sufficient number is present to justify the resumption of the work. Porto Rican American Tobacco Co. of P. R. San Juan, P. R., April 7, 1921.
PubltahM and diatributad nadar peral* (Ma. 801) authorized By the Act of October 6, 191T, on ale et fee foe" ei Ban Juan. Porto Bieo. By order of the Procidont, A. 8. Bur lobon, Postmecter General entered ea aeoond elaao wetter, fobruery 81. 1919, et the Poet Office et Ban Joan, Porto B> co, United Btetoc of Amarlo andar the Ac* of march a ia "o
The Cuban "Commission" is a danger to Puerto Rican sugar.
THE UPCOMING EMERGENCY TARIFFS - THE "FEDERAL" AGAINST THE "CUBAN COMMISSION" INTERESTING REMARKS BY DON JOSE RUIZ SOLER
Yesterday we visited Don Jose Ruiz Soler, secretary of the "Asociación de Produc : tores de Azúcar' ' of the island, whom we ha- i lled at his private office in the * Pia ] zuela'..., . Our desire was to know the opinion of the distinguished financier concerning the latest reports received from Washington, on the tariff legislation, which is shortly to be submitted to Congress. What are your latest impressions on the subject," I asked him. -By yesterday's mail," he said, "I received reports from Washington that President Harding will approve Representative Fordney's emergency tariff bill shortly after the special session of Congress opens next Monday. A large portion of the American press, in cooperation with certain industrial interests in the Northern and Eastern States, is making a strong opposition to the emergency tariff bill, trying at once to impress upon the legislators and the general public that it is the passage of a legislative provision designed to save from ruin the large holders of stocks of wool, wheat, sugar, etc., in the central Southern and Western States. But the strength of the agricultural and industrial interests of these States, which are located in these regions, is so strong and so just a cause, that it has gone so far as to get President Harding to speak in favor of the passage of a temporary emergency bill to protect these products pending the passage by Congress of a permanent tariff bill. The new emergency bill, once enacted into law, would protect the products specified in it by its tariff increase for a period of six months, instead of ten months, as in the previous bill vetoed by President Wilson. This reduction in the time in which the said bill is to be in force, as soon as it becomes law, is due to the fact that the leaders of Congress who have in their hands the preparation of the same, firmly believe that six months is long enough for Congress to study and make the general revision of the permanent tariff bill into law..... -What reports do you have on the Financial Commission and the Cuban revenues?
-The latest details received from New York indicate that the Federal Sugar Refining Co., always consistent with its traditions, is again appearing before the American people as a great protector of the interests of the consuming public, seeking to file suit in the New York courts, with the object of dealing a death blow to the Cuban Financial Commission appointed by the President of the United States to deal a death blow to the Cuban Financial Commission. Last night, in the Isabel II street, in the Marina, a bloody event took place in which Juan Quiñones, 122 years old, white, a native of Lares and a clerk in a store in the aforementioned neighborhood, and Guillermo Borrero, 21 years old, a native of Utuado, were the protagonists. . When they met at the site, they fought fiercely and Quiñones was seriously wounded by a dagger, presenting the following wounds: a 1 cm. incision in the frontal region; another in the inter parietal region of 4 cm.Another of 3 eras, of angular shape in the left parietal region; one of 1 cm. on the left shoulder; another of 4 cm. on the posterior face of the inner third of the left arm; another in the left axillary region of 2 cm. and another superficial one of 5 cm. in the left intercostal region. Guillermo Borrero, the aggressor, received a slight incised sunerfical wound on the anterior side of the upper third of the left forearm. The wounded were treated in Fi Fi aid room and the Quiñones then passed to the hospital, the assailant having been taken to jail cipalLa police seized the weapon used by the assailant, which is a dagger - 5 3) 4 inches long by 1 1|4 wide. Among the neighbors, the police have been able to get (Continued on page 6)
Menocal to sell the sugars of the current crop of the Greater Antilles. The ' ' ' ' Federal ' ' ' alleges that Messrs. Costelio, Logan and Louri, who constitute the Sales Sub-Committee of said Commission, are American citizens; and, therefore, can be prosecuted for violating the federal law against trusts. We all know - Mr. Ruiz Soler continues - that the Refinery and other sugar interests in New York have been opposing the actions of the said Sugar Commission; to such an extent that the Senate was forced to request from the Department of State an investigation into the purposes proposed by the Cuban Government in constituting in New York a Commission to regulate the sugar industry. New York a Commission to regulate the prices of sugar, thus preventing, as alleged by the * * * Fe. deral", the free sale of sugars cu baths. The "Federal" also contends that this "Commission" is responsible for the fact that the price of sugar from that island has risen, from February 23 to date, from 84 to 85.114 per quintal, thus preventing the logical competition that should exist by virtue of supply and demand, The Senate may have some argument on which to base a request for a new investigation or to order, through the appropriate channels, the suspension of the aforementioned agency's business. The State Department informed the Senate that there was nothing to object to the proceedings of the "Commission", since, as has been said, President Menocal offered to regularize sales so that they would not exceed a price of $5.50 for Cuban sugar, which was equivalent to $6.50 for Puerto Rico. The sugar growers of the island should not have much confidence in the stability of the Cuban Financial Committee, because that body may disappear at any moment, thus triumphing the Federal, and, consequently, leave them with large stocks of unsold sugar in a market which, perhaps, would be demoralized, when the Cuban Commission ceases to function, and then we would have to compete with Cuba's own sugars and with foreign sugars. Up to this point, the interesting statements of Mr. José Ruiz Soler, to whom we thanked for all the attentions he gave us during the interview.
Sale "Post-Balance" - Gentlemen's Clothing : All stocks in our department are sold at half price : Kirschbaumb Pa|m Beach Pants Pure Wool Suits of Superior Quality. Navy Blue ( B | ue Serge.) $25.00 Pore Weave at $11.50 in Khaki ' Blue ' Green and others te go v tg Qft from $40 without vest at $20.00 to $9 95 and $13.75 daÍm' ócAruc 45.00 waterproof u 98 Styleplus at $8.34, $9.95 and $12.98. CASIMIR IN COLORS Wool Suits Policemen's | 12 .Q0 $4.98, $5 .48 and $6.58 || from $50 with vest at $25.50 GONZALEZ PADIN CO. INC. CREAM WOOL of $40 with vest at $27.50 San Juan. Ponee- Mayagüez. $8.50 , UMHBEBEBSSSS&KSKSES=eSE=23SS5SSBnS5==aSB===SXS===SSSaMSXS
THE BISHOP MUST t i BE PORTORRIQUEÑO I (By telegraph) i Yabucoa, April 8. ' EL MUNDO, t | San Juan* ¡ ! Session held last night agreed to transmit the following cable: "Cardinal Gasparri, Vatican, Rima. Junta católicos Yabucoa, unanimemen te implora Su Santidad nombramiento ¡ ] obispp nativo.- José Dávila, Presi- ■ dente." Arturo MARTINEZ, SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT. \ . I. - r.
Theater "America" i Today high moral program WILL ROGER in the comedy "Almost a Husband" Matinee and evening Tomorrow Sunday:-Matinee and evening, is treno in Puerto Rico of the drama by Billie Rhodes "The Cry of Love" Matinee:-Final "THE GREAT SECRET AND PEARL WHITE' in the episodes' first "BL DANGER OF A SECRET" 5 and 10 cents.
30 NATIONS TO TAKE PART IN CONFERENCE NEW YORK, April 8.-The General Association of Manufacturers announces that more than thirty nations will take part in trade conferences to be held in this city on the 16th of next month, on the commercial situation of the entire world and future plans for its development. Mr. Hughes will open the session, which will also discuss what the United States can offer the world to help it to solve the grave crisis it is facing.
SATURDAY, APRIL 9, 1921
THE SWORD OF DAMOCLES HANGING OVER CUBA
We read in a Havana newspaper the following serious news, which we are about to reproduce: ' * It is said with considerable insistence in political circles that in the early hours of the morning an important cable had arrived at the Secretary of State, coming from the Cuban Legation in Washington. Many comments have been made on the contents of this cablegram. The "liguistas" say that the Cuban Minister has communicated to the Government that the United States Government recognizes Dr. Alfredo Zayas as the legitimate President, legally elected in the last elections. The liberals maintain the opposite. They say that Mr. Céspedes has communicated to General Menocal that the Government of Washington will not recognize any Government that is the product of violence, fraud and intimidation. What is certain is that the cablegram exists and that the Government has not wanted to give it to the public." As can be seen, the same thing that happened with the .cable in Cuba, has happened here with the "letters". And, since Cuba and Puerto Rico are similar in everything, there, as well as here, there are also "liguistas". With the difference that, in the south of Puerto Rico, they call them "ligaos". Guaraguaos! " " - There, as here, sensational rumors also circulated. See how the rumors began to spread over Havana: "Last night sensational news circulated in the political centers. The news in synthesis is this: a cablegram from the U.S. Secretary of State has reached the Government of Cuba in reply to one sent by the Cuban Foreign Ministry informing of the election of Dr. Alfredo Zayae as President of the Republic. In the cablegram from the American Foreign Ministry, the Government of Cuba is informed that the United States Government will not recognize any President who has not been legally elected or proclaimed correctly. This news was circulated yesterday evening. Have you noticed? ... .... "It is made known to the government of Cu. ba, that ti of the United States will not recognize any President who has not been lawfully elected, nor constitutionally proclaimed.' ' Almost the same words, although they may have been the expression of a different order of ideas, which were transmitted to Puer to Rico. Instead of "It is made known to the Government of Cuba that the Government of the United States will not recognize any President," read: "It is made known to Puerto Rico that the Government of the United States will never recognize Independence," and we have the same thing, expressed with almost the same diction. - In conclusion, see the cablegram published a few days ago by the newspaper 'He raido de Cuba': "CROWDER STAYS TO FINISH HIS PLAY: WASHINGTON, March 18.-At the America Theater The coolest, the most comfortable, the most popular, the favorite of all the public of San Juan and especially by the ladies, without distinction of classes. The fa- ¡ miles come, with all confidence, because we do not exhibit movies for men alone. í Advt. Gran Circo Oscar lavender TODAY BIG FUNCTION In Santurce, Parada 16, Carretera Nueva At 9:00 P. M, NEW ARTISTS Presentation of the applauded clown i " Can tali ció el Feo" PRICES Box seats with four chairs, $2.50 Lunettes, 50 Lunettes for children, .25 Ticket to bleachers, .25 Ticket to bleachers, children .15 MATINEE SUNDAY 3:30 Plating and lining buttons. A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. áin
NUMBER 658
NEW SCRIPTlNG FOR 'THE WORLD' COMPETITION
SCRUTINY PRACTICED ON NABRIL 8, 1921 | Mcnsita Rodriguez, San Juan, 6416 'Carmen Amador, San Juan, 5229 I Pilar Santana Becerra, San Juan, 4535 Josefina Ruiz Rexach, Santurce, 3154 Clotilde Benitez Rexach, Santurce, 2137 Maria Cristina Porrata, San Juan, 1896 Esther Cuevas del Toro, San Juan, 1610 Angelina Tarrido Jimenez, S. J. 1140 Carmen Jiménez Aguayo, 8. J_, 877 Patria L. Vivas, Ponce, 720 Gloria María Vázquez, Cataño, 676 1 Isolina Martínez, San Juan, 556 [ Perpetua Guzmán, Cataño, 510 Amida Torree, San Juan, 483 I Florencia Quilicbiui, Ponce, 414 Araceli Vicente, San Juan, 391 : Ernestina Rifas, San Jpan, 373 Blbita García, San Juan, 366 Rosa María Reselló, San Juan. 358 Maria E. Campos, San Juan, 300 Providencia Morillo, San Juan. 207 Manuela Rocafort, San Juan, 2Q6 María Iriarte, San Juan, 177 Luz María Puig, Caguas, 161 Carmen Aponte, Santurce, 142" María L. Goicuría, San Juan, 126 Lolita Córdova, San Juan, 120 Frasquita Bermúdez, Santurce, 119 NOTES:-(1). We inform the interested parties that the canvasses are held on Tuesdays and Fridays, after noon, and therefore, any vote which is not turned in before noon of said days, will not be counted until the next canvass. (2). -We only give to the public the names of those ladies who have from 100 votes in ade- ! lente. j 1--. .State Parliament has expressed the opinion that General nor'-eMae "i-cano Crowder will remain in Havana until the Cuban Presidential question has been settled, so that there will be no disputes. But there are no disputes in Cuba!!! For that, to avoid them, the liberal party went into retreat. So, if that is the only mission left for Mr. Crowder to accomplish in Cuba, he can now calmly consider it finished." i O ro electoral quarrel. The same there as among us. And for greater similarity, the two lawsuits will have the same consequences. It is not for nothing that the famous verses say: Cuba and Puerto Rico are the two wings of a bird. They receive the same bullets AND, AT TIMES, THE SAME BUBON! Luis DEL MONTE. I " Wl 1 ■' J ■ 1 ■ ' ■ ■ ■ ■ ■* 1 I Important Notice - TO CONCESSIONHOLDERS AND THE PUBLIC IN GENERAL Mr. Larvett and the artists who are to take part in the GRAN FERIA DEL ' ' ' HIPODROMO. having been unable to embark by the steamer "San Lorenzo", its opening is transferred to SATURDAY, the 23rd of the present. Persons interested in booth space of all kinds, can meet with Mr. J. FELICES at the Hippodrome Offices, Parada 20, Santurce, Santurce. Stop 20, Santurce, ' from 0 to 12 A. M. and from 2 to 5 P. M. daily. Mr. Larvett announces shows of great sensation never seen in Puerto Rico. | , Advt. * ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' TRAVEL OPPORTUNITY Lady or young lady of Spanish nationality is needed to go to Spain accompanying a family. Address Apartado 258 San Juan. ) Advt.