ELWNDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING PAPER, EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
Vnkiitaad uta distribuí "* pamit (M". 801) -taátiU "d by th" Act of oetobsr e, 1917. on *1" nt iba Poat Offlca of Ban Jm*. Porto Bieo. By order of th* PraeMeai A. * *vr loeon, Poatmaater General. Entered ee aoeond eleae Better, fabrearr *1. 1*1*. et the Poat Office at 8en Jean, Ri co. United 8t "toa of America under the Art of march t. 18T."
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1921.
NUMBER 613.
. SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
DASPARAQUENO SEBURLELAIEY, S.R.I.
Yesterday we visited in his office* in the Federal building *1 Commissioner of 1* Prohi bidon, Mr. Donaldson, with the desire to know the scope of the prohibited granddaughter law, after his recent amendments, according to the press of the last few days, --For some time-no* said Mr. Donaldson, the law has been striving to make the only ones authorized to sell liquor. This* question is being the subject, on our part, of a careful study, * to see to what extent liquor may be sold for the medicinal purposes prescribed by science. We have always been making an effort* to reduce the consumption of alcoholic beverages to the smallest possible amount. -Yes, in these days I have brought serious charges against the proprietors of public establishments, who are selling liquor illegally. In 1* la la, at present, there are only two persons who, without being pharmacists, are authorized to do so. Of the rest, no one My peáideM* before the Court-con. timad MT. DenaMson anlirftawdo that< nsmparaeran peca snfrir a interroga tatoMéatiH 4" loe cited establishments, tide, as you say, uní new phase of 1 aley Volstead at Puer te Rico...... And it is our purpose to adopt as many measures as may be inlispe: wise, within the just, to cense, guir that the people become familiar com. pintly with the spirit of 1* Law. It is of importance that you should record in your paper, that since the gil d* May suffice that of November last, n" ee gave not a single vio. ladée * the Volstead Act, on the part of merchants. This office would only be attentive to signaos, deMde to "tartos invetantasioo erraros, without having" proeodido judicially in coate" of fiadle. For the rest, we conform to * the Law, making it compliant in all its parts, now and forever, as long as I am in Puerto Rico. -I reply to the news that you say that an employee of the Prohibition may search a house to enforce the law without a search permit, I can tell you that this office has no instructions as to that particular, nor will I do so until I am convinced of its certainty and the circumstances demand it. In Puerto Rico, as in any other part of the country, as in any other part of the world, if it is auctioned today Saturday & at 2 o'clock in the afternoon in the premises of the "NEW BAZAR" Crux 12, will be auctioned to the best bidder and at the sweep, by lot, all the existing items of this establishment composed of silk fabrics, women and children's suits, showcases, sewing machines, etc. * THE FOLLOWING ARE REQUESTED: ENDOWERS.
eAVI SO . '' . We are pleased to advise our distinguished clientele that we have just received the famous FULPER TonemSs filters, all lot numbers. Order yours before they run out. . v . "THE ¿MUCHACHOS" SÜC8. DE A. MAYOL & co. fe 1 ' "" ' - - - WE HAVE ACAnALAPP I use > " <.■' - * * : t f dldR - Ote
INCIDENT BETWEEN JAPANESE AND NOR- ! TE-AMERICANS
An important Colombian newspaper published the following correspondence, dated in Colón: "A few days ago* a Japanese merchant steamer crossed the Panama Canal, which carried the Panamanian flag hoisted on the main mast. The North American authorities of the canal signaled to the ship to lower the American flag, but the Japanese did not pay the slightest attention. At the time the ship docked at the pier, the port captain, a Yankee, asked the steamer's captain why the Panamanian flag was crossing the canal, and demanded that he lower it at once and float the American flag instead. The Japanese captain told him that, being in Panamanian waters, it was his duty to fly the Panamanian flag at the top of the mast, and that he could not and would not lower it. A short time later that employee returned with a company of soldiers, undoubtedly to intimidate the Japanese; but the latter, without wasting time, lowered the plank from the ship to the dock and spread a Japanese flag over it. The prudent intervener and his soldiers saw fit to turn back the way they had gone, and did not dare to pass over the flag of Japan. The harbor master referred the matter to the general, who stated Edward that what had happened was of no importance and to give no attention to it, but begged the newspapers to make no mention of the matter. The Japanese steamer unloaded, took coal, asked to sail, which was denied, and without caring about such a refusal, she took sail and passed through the Panama flag on the top of the mainmast. If the disposition of the ship was certain, let us put it into practice, as long as the strict compliance of the Law demanded it - ? -I do not know where some of the newspapers of this city got the news that I had been aboard Morgan's yacht during his recent visit to the island. This information is untrue; for my official presence was on board that vessel, where the most respectful observance of Federal law was observed. I can likewise inform you, that this office would never have hesitated to intervene with the said yacht, and with Mr. Morgan, had certain* extra, limitations been effected there. Please note this to the public WITH 8UMIDOE. Mr. Donaldson does not want *a ber nor of the saint of the antiprohibitionis. tions, whom he will accuse, no matter their conditions of big, small, rich or poor. X Another shipment arrived g S of the famous I GASOLINE g MOTOR1NE I STUBBE BROS., INC. Tanca 9. I San Juan, P. R. | I San Juan, P. R. | I San Juan, P. R. |
Count Bernstofi, former German ambassador to the U.S.B., threatens the Allies.
GREAT CONSPIRACY OF "BOLSHEVIKIS" IN FRANCE.-THE BELGIANS' FIRE ON GERMANS.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) HAMBURG O, February 11.-The Count de Bernstorff, in a speech delivered at the Convention of the Democratic party, expounded that Germany must not confine herself to resisting the Allies firmly, but must seek an alliance with the United States, with whom it will be convenient for her to comply. Bernstorf also stated that the attitude of the Americans and that of Harding was not very favorable to him at present. FRANCE HAS TODAY THE MOST FORMIDABLE ARMY (BY FRENCH CABLE) WASHINGTON, February 11- In formes addressed to Congress, by the Secretary of War, Mr. Baker, show that France has today the most formidab'c army that exists in the world, for which some newspapers do not hide from saying that it constitutes a serious threat to the peace that should govern the whole orb. According to the official notes sent by Mr. Baker, the permanent army of the French Republic has a total of 7324,000 soldiers, which includes the colonial and reserve troops, amounting to 156,000 men. Mr. Baker adds that the army of Italy has 350,000 men, but the reserves are not included in the above-mentioned sum, which amounts to 416,300GREAT "BOL8HBVIKI" CONSPIRACY IN FRANCE PARIS, February 11. Searches made by the police in the "Communist Federation "* and in the homes of its most suspicious members, have enabled the authorities to surprise an active correspondence between the French Communists and the headquarters of the Russian "Bolsheviks", operating in Berlin. I - They also managed to surprise revolutionary plans, which would soon blow up the institutions of the Republic, where the "Soviet" would be established, which would function in agreement with the red Bolsheviks in Moscow. BELGIANS FIRE ON GERMANS LONDON, February 11.-A dispatch from Amsterdam to the "Exchange Telegraph*', says that there have been grsví-l simo* riots in Aachen, in the Belgian zone of occupation. The Germans refused to obey the orders of the Belgian authorities, and refused to remain in the streets until the early hours of the morning, whereupon they kicked and set fire to the uninvited, filling the cafes and public squares with wounded people, where they were crushed and hundreds of people were injured. ba - and HUNDREDS *DB COMMUNISTS REDUCED TO PRISON. LONDON, February 11.-News* ofltial character received here, say qu* the French government has begun to strike vigorous blows* against ti co. ' zranisn.*}, whose principal directors "*, ' s" titensntran already in prison; H number of daten* datenata* passes d" ctan. Today, ' ' ' jJrnSoiar puerto rioo. * actot ' r regaos coreiEifreB '
THERE WILL BE NO WAR WITH THE ENGLISH j Í ¡ WASHNGTON, Feb. 11-Apr? u. rándose to cnn9V r instructions from sn Government, Mr. Leslie, representative di. The British phlegmatic representative, went in haste to visit the Secretary of State, Mr. Colby, to whom he, on behalf of the British Government, emphatically denied the reports which have been made public in the last few days, asserting that the British Ministry of State has been operating. The reports which have seen the light of day in the last few days, in which it was stated by various correspondents of the United States press, that this nation and Great Britain would declare that they would be free from one moment to the next. LONDON, February 11. -The Foreign Office today issued a strongly worded statement in which it asserted that reports published in the United States press on Tuesday, asserting that officials in the United States had been killed and that the United Kingdom had been killed by the United States. The statement was made in very vigorous tones, in which it affirmed that the reports published in the United States press on Tuesday, which claimed that English officials had given: the voice of the nation, assuring that relations between England and the United States would come to an end, were not true. W ' ■ INTERESTING DETAILS SUPPLIED BY THE REPUTABLE OFFICE OF THE NISTRADOS BY THE REPUTABLE OFFICE OF "PESQUERA Y PES. QUERA; INC.'' (SPECIAL REPORT TO "THE WORLD" SUGAR:-Holders trying to support prices. Buyers inclined to make purchase*. Cuba sells at $3.62 and a half uu, an increase of 11 and a c. Refined still. At the opening of the row four market, a sale of ten thousand bags was reported from Puerto Rico at $4.51 OIF to the FEDE RAL, it being made clear that it had been a previous day's trade. Very little sugar was offered, and apparently the position of the holders was "stronger, asking $3.75 c. & f. for February shipments from Chiba. At noon it was learned that the FEDERAL had bought ■ fifteen thousand saces of the old crop from Cuba for shipment in 1* next sema ¡ na at $3.62 and a half c. and f. which denotes an increase of one-eighth of a cent i over the last price paid. A prominent broker reported yesterday as follows: "Persistent rumors of sales of some consideration of the new co. ' aecha of sugar effected by Cuba to European interests, apparently is(Continued on p. 2). Special races The board of directors of the Hippodrome has agreed to hold four races for half-blooded horses that have never raced at any Hippodrome in Puerto Rico. The first race will be held on the first Sunday of April 1921; the second on the first Sunday of May 1921; the third on the first Sunday of June 1921; and the fourth on the first Sunday of July 1921. For each race, the following $400.00 per race will be paid: First.
The following statements, which are close to the maximum degree of tension, are completely slanderous, and are, therefore, without foundation PARIS, February 11. Chamber, Mr. Louchier declared that it is necessary to fix Germany's debt between 200,000,000,000,000 and 210,_ 000,000,000,000 marks, of which France will get 52 per cent, of which q. will have to devote 44,000,000,000,000 pen sions. TREMENDOUS MOTION OCCURRED IN THE PHILIPPINE CAPITAL The riot which occurred recently in Manila was one of the most serious in the course of 22 years. Rebel troops attacked the police. Four Americans and seven Filipinos were killed, some of whom were bystanders. Reports state that the riot started from the sheriff's forces, as they were trying to avenge one of their comrades, wounded by a policeman, and the mistreatment of the wife of one of the sheriffs. Colonel Sweet, inspector general of the "sheriff's forces," who responded to the woman's attack, says: her suit was torn to pieces, and she was so insulted that it was enough to make anyone's blood boil. The mutiny was not an insurrection against the American authority. It had no political significance. It was not an incident of race or class struggle. It was one of those incidents that will occur as long as mankind lives. Brigadier General Rafael Orame, head of the Philippine Constabulary Corps, arrived at the scene of the incident and proceeded to disarm the rioters, immediately ceasing the tumult. Their promoters were locked up in barracks, and within twelve hours, all those who in any way were accomplices to the crime, were in jail. In the session held by the Municipal Assembly, the ordinances on transfers, to impose a "school-tax" contribution and to request an advance of 100,000 were approved on third reading. - During the course of the session some incidents arose between the majority and the minority of the assembly, all of which were favorably resolved by the presiding officer. The municipal legislators were working that day until two o'clock the following day, at which time the session was adjourned."What a world of feelings, sentiments and sweetness is contained in that word that makes the heart overflow with joy when she is with us; the word that tears the heart out of its sobs when she departs from this world. See the monumental produe. don. "WORLDLY AMBITIONS" in which Margarita Mann and Dorothy FhilUps play ti pspti of mother and daughter, respectively. Advt. THEATER "AMERICA" TODAY:-Debut of AUGEITCX GUTIE RREZ and BAUL DEL MONTE ■ Songs, Dances, Monologues, Guaracha* cu \ ban**, Rumba* *' Also loe eplaodes 8 and 9 of El Rayo lnyi*ible I .Mzñen* jfiayt" * * * W7TORIA ' ' ' ANGXLIQR FREGl-I W*K LUNETA.
THE FRUIT INDUSTRY IS OF A BRIGHT FUTURE
Mr. Henricksen, head of the Federal Bureau of Agriculture, to questions num, after, gave us interesting details yesterday about fruit production in the country. Mr. Henricksen says that during the last four years an average of 425,000 boxes of grapefruit have been plundered annually in the island; 360,000 of pummelos and 475,000 of chinas, having noted that the production of the latter has decreased this year. The volume of exports for a ¡-product whose industry has been developing on the island for 18 or 20 years, could be called small, if we did not know that the business ¡or almost the entire business, is in the hands of the mainlanders, only. Why is this? It is because this business requires a perfect knowledge if good results are to be achieved. .... According to Mr. Henricksen. there are already natives who have fruit plantations and are studying the business. The parts of the island that produce the most fruit are Arecibo and Rio Piedras, and there are also abundant harvests in Bayamon, Naguabo, Bayamon, Naguabo and Rio Piedras. Bayamón, Naguabo, Fajardo, Maya guez, etc. The lack of roads in the fruit farms causes losses to the same, because they are damaged with the inconvenience of' tr? sprrte, etc. As far as quality is concerned, the fruits of all the regions are of good quality. The business of írutas, expired certain day rltadcs from the time they are plucked from the plant until they reach the U.S. greengrocer's market. will be excellent. It is necessary to look for the n-edfo that the least possible number ' of fruits, especially tornnlas. and what the fruit growers call 1" sflvébttw'* fruits, most pftós <fl - tes cíalos grow in the coffee plantations. ' THE ME PC ADO OF THE ISLAND'S FRUITS DEPENDS ON THE FLORI. DA: Mr. Henricksen, who visited the United States on important business re i laxion with the industry, says that prices for the country's fruits in the 1 i North, depend on the ca'idad and canti. The United States, in important negotiations with the industry, says that the prices for the country's fruits in the North depend on the quantity and amount of them that enter the market from Florida, which ordinarily sell more because they are better known to the public than ours, and also because that country produces a greater quantity, since for every ten boxes of grapefruit, for example, that Florida sends, we send one. In the first week of January fruit* from the country were sold at an average of three and four dollars a box FREIGHT:' The freight between the island* and the United States is another difficulty for our fruit. For each box, sixty (Oontinfia on page 3." ¡ - I I-I- l -H "l*l f l I I H-|. ITELEFONO 491 SANTUR- ■■ CE.-When you ñecesi- -- i - " e e e ;; urgently need something from - ;; Pharmacy or have a re- ;; ;; ;; ceta that must be despa- * * * " ched at once, call ;; 491 Santurce>-GUARANTEE " ABSOLUTE.-THE PHAR. " MACEUTICAL CO. OF P. R. ■■■
PREPARE AGAINST USURY BY 'LENDERS
Our information of several days ago regarding the abusive business committing howling moneylenders, both in San Juan and in ti rest í!<the island, has been echoed by the public, and we can inform our readers that the 'Association of Employees of the Insular Government' has instructed its 'Legislation Committee' to prepare a bill for submission to the Legislature, by means of which a 'Loan and Savings Society'* will be created to stimulate savings among the employees, and facilitate loans to them, in order to avoid the exploitation to which they are being subjected by the moneylenders, whose claws are taking a considerable part of their assets every month. The idea of the aforementioned "Association" could not be more correct. It responds to the highest spirit of justice and the Legislature, protecting the economic welfare of the people against such parasites, should give it the necessary attention. The regulatory action of a law attacking the charging of interest on certain loans is necessary, considering that these are exaggerated. In Cuba, measures have already been adopted against usury, which causes so many evils. Other important laws are being discussed right now, so that the regulatory intervention of the state will put a dam to all the excesses. Here, in Puerto Rico, the same must be done. We have reports that lenders are doing business, amounting to $10,900 per month, with the employees of the island government, who, in times of transient needs, have to pay the rate of interest that the loan sharks charge them, because, if they do not, they will not provide the amount requested. We are glad that our information has given rise to the insular employees to ask for a measure as necessary as urgent, our Legislature. WITH THE WEAPON HE WAS CARRYING i I a poHcía de Manatí informs that the boy Esteban Dominguez died as a result of a wound he prodNijo when he fell against a machete he was carryingThe police investigated the case. ROOM In the street of the Cross 11 high left a good room is rented. It is plisa and forran botone". A CARAZO, Brau St 72. Advt ST THOMAS ST CROIX "MYSTERY" Leaving Monday Feb. 14, 5 P. MANTILLES TRADING CO. Across from Pier 2. Tel. 1042.
t yiviso Since Feb. 1.4, we have nothing to do with the V apores Company RED "D" LINE. \ WE OFFER to our clientele and* favorers CABIDA FOR : NEW YORK by steamer LAKEFANQUIER - .--t: OF THE -- BALTIMORE STEAMSHIP CO. leaving late February VILLAR, & CO., INC. J 2 - Catarina ■ Sanjuan, P. R. - Tel. 347