ELMWNDO
-- . ~ - - -■ r8 pages 3 ctvs Semester, $4.00 One year, $.7.50
Offices: r Salvador Brau, 81 Tol. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING PAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
PublUhad distributed andar parmit (No. 801) latborued by the Act of oetober ", 1917, on file at the Post Office of San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. 8* Bnr leson. Postmaster General. Entered as second class natter, i febrnary 11, 1919, at the Post Office at Ban Juan, Por* Ri co. United States of America under the Act of march 8. 1879 II
SATURDAY, JULY 23, 1921. jm' -t. i. i - TJJJ..U . 'aassamsmEsanp
NUMBER 749.
Washington displeased at British objection Japan says Yap and Shantung settled.
The 'certiorari' on the auction of the Ponce market place.
The Ponce District Court, on its session of the 21st, ruled without granting the writ of certiorari - filed by attorney Eduardo Flores Colón on behalf of the auctioneer, José Barbosa, in the matter of the famous auction of the Plaza de Mercado of the City of Bar. "Thus, in spite of the opinion of the attorney for the Municipality, Mr. Sepúlveda, who acknowledged in the hearing of this case that the auction was illegal, the District Court had the last word in the matter. This important litigation has awakened extraordinary public interest, due to certain disagreements between the two parties in power, giving rise to the resignation of the Public Service Commissioner, Mr. Parra Capó, and the Public Works Commissioner, Mr. Ealichs, who did not resign from their posts, since they were called to a meeting in which Mr. Parra was given due satisfaction; The public is anxiously awaiting the action to be taken by the Municipality in view of the decision just rendered by our District Court, since the same is almost a disavowal of an act which from the beginning deserved the harshest censure of the people in general. CORRESPONDENT. AN AMERICAN CHESS CHAMPION WILL PLAY TOMORROW AT THE ATENEO Tomorrow, Sunday, at nine o'clock before noon, will be held in the halls of the "Ateneo Portorriqueño'' an interesting game of simultaneous, which will be played by the champion of the State of New Jersey, Mr. E. Armstrong, against all the players who present themselves. To play with the American champion reigns a great enthusiasm among the "ama teurs*'' of the wonderful game-science, because Mr. Armstrong is a formidable player who assures to beat the one who plays the most in Puerto Rico, giving him a rook. INTERESTING CHALLENGE . BASE-BALL'' For the 30th, an interesting base-ball challenge has been arranged between the teams of the St. Thomas naval station and the officers stationed in San Juan. The St. Thomas team will come to San Juan in the "Vixin" and bring their band. The deapfio will take place at Morro Field**.
Italy will send to Upper Silesia a large number of soldiers.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) ROME, July 22.-The Italian government has decided to send reinforcements" * toUpper Silesia, to prevent disorders from occurring. Two Italian regiments will shortly arrive in the said region. WASHINGTON, June 22 Dispatches from Tokyo are commented on in this city, where it is considered that the Yap and Shan tung Island questions were finally settled by the conference in Paris, and will not be brought up for discussion at the disarmament conference. It is believed that the Mandates question will again be sent for consideration to the principal Allied powers, and the Shantung question, which in the opinion of the Japanese statesmen, should be settled by interested powers alone and exclusively, and not by outsiders. WASHINGTON DISGUSTED AT LONDON'S OBJECTION WASHINGTON, July 22.-The desire of the London government to adjourn until next spring the meeting to discuss disarmament has caused lively displeasure in the American government. THE INTERVENTION OF THE TROOPS IN OUpper Silesia IS NECESSARY PARIS, July 22.-The newspapers of this city approve the attitude of the French Government with regard to Upper Silesia. They emphasize, however, that the Supreme Council can neither deliberate nor impose decisions if the forces in Upper Silesia are insufficient. BELGIUM WISHES TO TAKE PART IN THE DISARMAMENT CONFERENCES BRUSSELS, July 22.-With regard to disarmament, Belgium, which is part of the block of Western powers, wishes, on behalf of Belgian interests in the Far East, to take part in the disarmament conference to be held in Washington. PARIS, June 22.-The arrival of the 'Entente' Commissioners, elected to settle the conflict in Upper Silesia, is regarded in this city as an event of great importance. The commissars maintain the need for reinforcements to be sent to the plebiscite region if they are to avoid any damage.
NOTICE . ""I 1 Owing to the questions which are daily ha- H ¡ ¡i cated to us by some tobacconists who are at present working in our factories, we hereby make it publicly cons||| tar that all tobacconists who have en|j trayed after the suspension, in accordance with the aviH so published under date April 7 in the locaH !e8 newspapers, and in accordance with the letter of our Presi- I || dent of April 11, can count on permanent work. || We will fulfill all that we have offered and no one abso||| lutely can induce us to change the policy ti adopted. t || The abnormal situation through which our in|| dustry is passing only permits us to employ the number<e traba||| jadores that justifies the cigar orders in hand and at present only a small number of me- ; sas and vacancies remain which within a corty term is- P petamos to fill with the large number of applicants who r have come forward in the last few days. H The new operators who have recently joined the factories will be respected by the Company in their rights, as well as the old ones, and will remain in their posts. * I PORTO RICAN AMERICAN TOBACO CO. of P. R., San Juan, P. R, July 20, 1921.
PHILIPPINES DESIRES * U.S. PROTECTION.
MANILA, July 16.- The rumor seems to be gaining momentum in certain circles that the political leaders of the Philippines will put aside for the time being their aspirations for absolute independence and will try to - do the same. The political leaders of the Philippines have been rumored to set aside for the time being their aspirations for absolute independence and will try to reach an arrangement with the United States which will allow them all the benefits of a free government and at the same time be compatible with some protection by the United States, as stated by Mr. Manuel Quezon, President of the Senate, before leaving for America. "The commercial and political relations which the Philippines are to maintain with the United States and the extent of the intervention of the latter, if any, in our foreign relations, are matters which can and should be dealt with directly by the representatives of the two countries, duly authorized to do so. The Wood-Forbes mansion report will undoubtedly tip the balance in the matter of the international situation and I hope it will have a great influence on the opinion of the American government.'' These statements have been interpreted as indicating that the Philippine leaders will try to get everything they can and that their main interest lies in preserving the freedoms they have been granted, while seeking new ones as long as they can retain the friendship and protection of the United States. THE UNITED STATES NEITHER ACCEPTS NOR DISPUTES THE CANCELLATION OF THE ALLIED DEBT. EUROPE WILL HAVE TO PAY THE GILLION DOLLARS WITH INTEREST International News Service WASHINGTON, July 11.-The United States will not accept or even discuss proposals to cancel all or part of the eleven million dollar debt owed to this country by the Allies, according to the statement made before the Senate by the Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Mellon. Nor is it intended to make any further advances on account of the commitments made to foreign countries by the administration of President Wilson. Specifically, the Secretary referred . Specifically, the Secretary referred to the credits that had been earmarked for the black republic of Liberia, which will not receive a single dollar. The Secretary of the Treasury presented clear evidence that England had tried during Mr. Wilson's presidency to have them cancelled by the United States. Mr. Mellon handed to the Treasury Committee a copy of a long letter from Lloyd George to the President, dated August 8, 1920, in which the question of the United States Government consenting to a liquidation of the Allied debt was slipped in. - A cablegram from the head of the British Treasury to the financier R. O. Lindsay, I representative of the Treasury Department in Washington, assured that the British Government "would welcome a general cancellation of the debts between the Associated Governments in the war". The Secretary reaffirmed and emphasized his statement that this administration would neither accept nor discuss proposals for remission of the eleven billion dollar debt owed by Europe to the United States. The Allies will have to pay the full amount with interest in such form as may be agreed upon in Washington. I ACCEPT THE CHALLENGE I We are informed by the well-known young at| lete Pedro Martinó, that he accepts the challenge I launched in the newspaper "El Impartial" t I' dated 19 of the current. The distance and the amount of the bet are left to his opponent's choice.
Janowski embarks on the 30th
According to news received from New York, this famous chess master will embark on the steamship "San Juan'' on the thirtieth of the current for Puerto Rico. At present he is taking part in the great Atlante Oity tournament for the championship of the United States. He and Marshall are in the front rank. He will probably play his first games at the Ateneo where he will find himself every afternoon playing games with our best champions. From San Juan he will go to the city of Aree bo where he will take part in several challenges with the champion Padilla. During his stay, and under his direction, a tournament will be prepared in which all the good players of the Island will take part, and at once it will be decided who is the true champion of Puer-' to Rico. There are different opinions among the lovers of this difficult art about the height of our players. Foreigners generally believe that we do not have first-rate players, but many who have carefully analyzed the most important challenges believe that we have in our ranks players of real drive such as Cintron, Padilla, Canelo, Amadeo, Bovira, Pont, W|lf, Ettlinger. Soler, O'Neill, Morales, etc., etc., etc. The interesting season is coming soon and we will have Henos every afternoon in our social centers. GRADUATION PARTY - . i On ¿fe 408" Wr la noch " "e will take effect at the Municipal Theater of this capital the graduation party of the stenographers and bookkeepers prepared at the highly accredited school "Royal Gregg'' which is directed by Mrs. Maria Teresa T. Camacho de Robles. For this reason, the young graduates have prepared an interesting program. People from various towns of the island who have relatives studying at this school come to San Juan on that day to attend such a beautiful event. The very intelligent boy Baúl Matos Bernier, son of the very ins pirado poet and orator, Don Rafael fía, tos Bernier, comes from Ponce to take part in the said celebration, reciting with the utmost mastery the" poems " Acuarela L' ' rica* of Mr. Matos Bernier, and the Sere nata of Schubert, melopea; of Gutié rrez Nájera, The closing speech is " in charge of the very eloquent tribune, vice-presl-dente of the Senate, Ledo. Juan Hernán des López. Tickets" for this event are available free of charge at the " Roya] Gregg College.'' FIFTEEN PERCENT AMENDMENT REJECTED I - 'I WASHINGTON, July 22.-The fifteen per cent amendment on the cotton and other commodities" article" was rejected at the House. Brtmo °n Fuerte' r -Program Paramount-Artcraft- GLORIA SWANSON-BEBE DANIELS AND THOMAS MBIGHAN in the grandiose super-production in 7 acts Why Change Wives? ' Here is solved the problem of married life PRICES Matin eé: Majors 20. TOMORROW SUNDAY "" Great film by the famous director Thomas Meighan "The White Circle" -MONDAY- Success- SUPREME LOVE- Success CURRENT PBEOIOS > Plisa and forran botone*. ACARAZO, Brau St 72. Advt,
AN ACCIDENT THAT COULD HAVE CULMINATED IN A SERIOUS TRAGEDY.
Last night, shortly after ten o'clock, saw an automobile at extraordinary speed from Santurce to this town (according to some, 65 miles). At Uegcr to Puerta de Tierra, in front of the square of "Los Leones", he ran in zlg-zags, as some suppose that he had a loose guide. There, he made a tremendous turn; and, s. the 50 meters of the turn he made, some observed that a lady who was beside the driver of the aforesaid guide had fallen to the ground. The car has the number 1364. When the car stumbled, the lady, who was in the front seat, jumped from the car to the ground, propelled by the tremendous speed. The Car has two wheels on the right broken. At eleven o'clock at night we telephoned the "Auxilio Mutuo**, where the aforementioned young lady was immediately taken, and we were told that she had not received any important injuries. DON FLORENCIO MIRANDA The distinguished gentleman, whose name heads these lines, organizer and director of large companies, rescinded his contract with the firm of "Alón-' so Riera y Co.**, to accept the high position of vice-president and general manager of the Madera Garcia Tobacco Company. We are pleased to congratulate the latter firm on the good acquisition it has made, for Mr. Miranda is one of the most active and intelligent men in the San Juan business. VILLAESPESA WILL ARRIVE AT THE END OF THE MONTH Yesterday afternoon Mr. Luis Reyes, representative of the dramatic company of the eminent poet Don Francisco Vülaespesa, received a cablegram in which the distinguished bard announces that he has embarked with the company for Puerto Rico, on the steamship "Montevideo**, which left Las Palmas for Puerto Rico a few days ago, and will arrive at this port at the end of the current month. The poet ViUaespesa and his company will remain here for two or three days, while the steamer arrives for Venezuela, where the Company that will premiere the drama "Bolivar", a play written by Vülaespesa in the birthplace of the Liberator, and of whose very celebrated reading in Caracas, EL MUNDO gave its readers ample information. NO CONFLICT BETWEEN LONDON AND PARIS i PARIS, July 22.-It is affirmed that there is no conflict between the governments of France and England, but that it was a misinterpretation on the part of the newspapers. BENEDETTI APPOINTED APOSTOLIC DELEGATE FOR PTO. Pietro Benedetti has been appointed apostolic delegate for Puerto Rico and Cuba and not for Mexico, as was believed, for which Monsignor Phii lipL , - - - ■ . ■ ... : kl
The application of the new U.S. emigration law.
The New York newspapers report daily-as a matter of sensational news-the arrest on ElUs Island of prominent personalities from Europe, who are surprised" when they arrive at the port's immigration station by the regulations of the new emigration law. We regret these disturbances to the travel of the illustrious people who travel in the sumptuous cabins of the great ocean liners. Designed to cut off in a spirit of evident rudeness and legislative empiricism the entry into the country of new contingents of emigrants who might further aggravate the labor crisis, the new regulation has clauses and prescriptions wholly inadequate to its object; and certainly the application of the reform deserves all manner of censure. The Congress of the United States may, no doubt, prevent access to the pass to any contingent of foreigners which may appear undesirable. But the truth is that the implementation of the new law has created conflicts that the national press does not understand in all its country to any contingent of foreigners are affected, in a way to- i mentable, by the new law. It seems incomprehensible that its provisions did not include measures and procedures, of absolutely guaranteed effectiveness, to inform of the new' state of affairs in the European ports and regions from which the emigrant caudel came; and that, moreover, this information was not sent with due' anticipation of the entry into force' of the new regulation. An illustrious Argonaut, in the comfort of a high-priced cabin, may, by his late exclusion from the United States, see the conclusion of great business deals or the course of a pleasure excursion disturbed. This is regrettable, but not tragic. But in the fate of the family of emigrants who left their homeland after an agonizing struggle against scarcity, facing enormous obstacles, liquidating the meager estate, sacrificing dear affections and entrusting the decisive destiny to the ultimate card of the trip to America, what problem so burdensome and so desperate does not this forced return to the port of departure signify? Numerous cases of this kind are already known, and there must be many more before the necessary measures are taken. The companies, or the American government, will bear the monetary cost of the return of these travelers, on the fatal journey, the end of which can only be imagined with horror. But the abominable conflict of the unsuccessful emigrant, who can remedy it, to whom can we turn for redress? In that immense country of fabulous potential and extraordinary resources, atom by atom, city by city, state by state, the blood and toil and existence of the emigrants has been made, atom by atom, city by city, state by state. It would not seem to be an excess of understanding, of broadmindedness and of well-understood homage to the progenitors of the Great Republic, if, in this Christ, the public spirit did not become - as seems to have happened - harsh, hostile and unsympathetic to foreign emigrants anxious to penetrate the American territory.
- f - - - .- - - '■ - R- I. P. Francisco Cabo y Sanchez ' HAS DIED Francisco Cabo Sanchez died at his residence in Mira- ; mar. His wife, mother, sisters and children and the Commercial Cabo ' y Gonzalez pupMcan commend His soul to God and attend ¿ the conduction of the corpse from the mortuary house to the Santurce Cemetery for which act they will be eternally grateful- , ddos.
More details about the horrific crime committed in Juncos
Expanding on the telegram that we published yesterday, about the crime committed in the "Luis" neighborhood, in the jurisdiction of Juncos, we can inform our readers that the facts, according to the versions circulating in the referred town, occurred in the following manner: EL MATODOR TORIBIO AQUINOToribio Aquino, the murderer of his own daughter, is a strong and corpulent man, about 50 to 52 years old, canid and with three daughters, plus two of them unmarried and one married, and with four sons already men and is the father of a young child and lives with his family in a neighborhood of Carolina. CANDELARIA AQUINO, THE VICTIM The victim, daughter of Toribio, is a* I young white, very graceful, blonde and about 26 to 27 years of age. THE DAUGHTER HAD BEEN ABUSED BY HER FATHER. Candelaria, who had always lived with her father, seems to have awakened in him with her beauty, a passion so unbridled that the father abused his own daughter and satisfied the desire that howled inside him. Once the dreadful crime had been committed, the father continued to subject the unfortunate young girl to the tremendous supplication of belonging body and soul to the very being who was the author of her days, until the day came when Candelaria was aroused to such feelings of revulsion and disgust at such a dreadful state of things, The unfortunate young woman, although keeping quiet about her father's crime, left the house of the scandal, and went to Juncos to an aunt's house. The father, then, victim of a stronger and uncontrollable passion inteptai to go again in search of Candelaria, who on knowing it escapes from the ca sa of his aunt and moved to FajardoAllá went again the father in bus cz of the daughter, but this time in company of a brother of her. Candelaria then flatly refuses to return to her father's house, and goes to the house of a brother she has in the "Lirios" neighborhood of Juncos. THE TRAGIC END When the father knew it, he went to the house where Candelaria was, and after begging her again to return with him, before the determined refusal of the poor girl, he shot her with a revolver, hitting her in the right clavicle and leaving her dead instantly. THE MATADOR ARRESTED. The matador was immediately (Continued on page 6) "EL FIGARO" The next hiñe* will close this barbershop at 12 M. as it is a holiday. Pedro Trujillo GüilTeatro "America" TODAY CINEMA AND VARIETIES TODAY Last show with the company "ESPAÑA-NIEVA" with the premiere in Puerto Rico of the original dramatic sketch of the literary Don Cristóbal Real entitled, "TODO EN AMOR ES TRIETE.... which deals with the modern and ancient woman (La Mujer Puertorriquefla). Also 1* film "BAJO EL CIELO ANDALUZ** tomada "h Andalucía, E "f Por 1* tarde gran matineé. Mafiana premiere fin Puerto Rico: Matinee and evening "BL AMOR SUPREMO", exciting dram* in 6 acts and "RUTH DE LAS MONTANA"".