EL MONDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year.$7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 | Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING NEWSPAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
1 1 1 ■' 11 ' ' ' ■ euBiMuea aua <u "tnDUMa under paraui ("o. aul) *athon*"d by th* Act at oelob*r 0, 1917, on 111* at lb* Po.l uIUm ol SAN JUAN PUERTO RICO a* n Juan, Porto Kle*. By order of the Preaident, A. 8. Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered a* second el*** matter. O v uw/tlv, ruuniu febrn*ry 31. 1918. at the Pest Office at San J "an, Porto co, United State* of America under the Act of taareb *. 1879
A40JI1
SATURDAY, MARCH 19, 1921
NUMBER 641
'4England--says an italian periodical--holds the government of the "bolshevikis."
90íU" mvÉo 18-The newspaper of Mi Mi - *H* Serio ' ", publishes a sensational arüculo on "1 which accuses the Great Bre- <♦ sesténér the "bolshevikism". i Ttpelo" ,of Rome says that Ines U only nation that protects "1 ffobíim* "Soviet", and that because of os£a Spuda lo has been able to surrender to Jbs frMfttes of Leniae. JI<iaUrta-adds "II' Pópela"-has Bacho that les great sacrifices of D" fiíklXJe, Koltchaak and Wrangel have gone *1 JtóMkoo. If the English were to fight confide <1 "belshcvíkiemo " already the Leníhe Government and Trotzky, they would have caí fe gara not to disturb the peace of the "united again. RATTBBA REFUSES DISARMAMENT LANDRES, March 18.-The "Berliner Tngeblatt" publishes an article, which has SQto much commented on by the English press -M stating that Bavaria denies I <ü disarmament It is enough that the Allies have i dqsocnpgdo the ccupied regions, per cryor that the occupation might occasion, u> new cor.fiietp and find the ex-. Empire completely disarmed. ALLIES TO HELP RUSSIAN REVOLUTIONISTS LONDON, March 18-Allied representatives have conferred in order to help the Russian rebels fighting against the "Reds". - The press assures us that the revolution, will be recognized, for the "Menshevikis' i i i i i NOTIFY i - ümertvee clients and the public "j- ¡ ' qn getnenal that we have appointed X -a - Snb-AfenteB our for the X ' : district of MAYAGÜEZ, P- R. | ¡ ¡ I Messrs. o sirai i co. I d * , ■ I- v ■ '. Ibnpkrrers' Liability í ' ' " ee Corp*" Ltd. -London. Porto X < > Rican And American Insurance x * * ! Ce. San Juan- Great American ¿ * * ' Insurance Co.. New York. Mu- X * > taal Life Insurance Co.. New T : York- Phoenix Insurance Co. + ; Hartford. ? i i i HARTZELL, CARRION & (or. | Telephone Bldg. X " SAN JUAN, P. R. I
have promised to recognize the debt of the former Empire*, if they take retrograde. This news has decided that the Allied countries are determined to favor the Kronstadt revolutionaries, for having considered the millions lent to Czar Nicholas as lost. FINLAND PROTESTS TO MOSCOW GOVERNMENT HELSINGFORS, March 18.-The gobie.* ■ has not protected in the most energetic manner for having crossed the frontier a large number of "Red" airplanes up to attack the* rebels on the frontiers of Finland and e* the fortresses of Kronstadt ' , PARIS, March 18. -In the course of a discussion on the London Conferences, the Socialist deputy M Auriol beat about the necessity of founding an international reconstruction bureau, in order to speed up the work in the devastated regions. LONDON, March 18. The Compensation Committee has met in Paris with the aim of forcing Germany to hand over twenty billion dollars of gold before the first of May. ! DUISEOURG, March 18-New contingents of French troops have arrived in this city in order to continue invading Teutonic territories. The Germans watch impassively the passage of the invading troops, who have occupied Mulheim, situated six kilometers from this city, as well as the roads leading to the city of Essen, famous for the manufacture of Krupp cannon. HAVANA, March 18-The triumph of Zayas has caused a lively impression among the Cubans. The President-elect, when interviewed, stated that he intended to combat the power of the Liberal party with the union of the Conservatives and the Popular Party. WASHINGTON, March 18.-The French Ambassador to the United States, M. Jusserand, has visited President Harding in order to announce it officially--source the visit of Viviani, former head of government in France. OPPORTUNITY AND PROFIT For being unable to attend to it its owner a provision store in the salle del Sel is for sale. Will report Benito URGAL, Salvador Brau 87, San Juan, P. R. Adrt.
TERRIBLE QUEMAZON The largest baratillo. Fabrics at five and six cents. Shoes at one peso. Everything for less than i to half its true value. At "LA TIENDA NUEVA''. Parada 21.-Carretera No. 191.- Near the Cine Puerto Rico. VILLAMIL * PEREIRA. Santurce.
SELECTION, RIALTO y TRES BANDERAS Present boy LAS HERMANAS TALMADGE NORMA y NATALIE En ra sublime drama of hate between Sex* "La Isla de la Conquista" O" 6 re* 1 * Aeotarpado por la mejor comedia de Harold Lloyd en do* reel* titled "SONAMBULA" EXTRAORDINARY PRICES.
The terrible plight of Puerto Ricans living in New York City.
New York, March 11, 1921 ¡ Beñcr Director of EL MUNDO, San Juan, Puerto Bico. MY DEAR FRIEND: May I take the liberty of replying here to the telegram I sent you on February 26, 1921, suspending the subscription opened on that island for the relief of the Puerto Ricans who are suffering from hunger here. I am sorry to tell you that the said cablegram was a serious error on my part, produced by several causes, as follows: 1:-In addressing the Mayor of New York, Mr. Hylan, he replied that he placed the matter in the hands of the Commissioner of Public Welfare. A representative of that Commissioner recommended to me an interview with the ' ' Charity Organization Society," 105 E. 22 St. I visited that Institution, and its representative, Roy P. Gatee, wrote me a letter, the tra-¡ [duction of which I send herewith. This letter, as you may observe, promised a satisfactory solution to the problem of the needy poor. 2:-8 If the New York Red Cross has done anything for the Puerto Ricans on this occasion, it should do so without the people of Puerto Rico sacrificing money to it. That is why I am of the opinion that the sum of $612.00 collected by the late Mrs. Isabel Motta de Rame- 1 ry, of Ponce, and which Mr. del Toro has sent to the Chairman of the New York' 1 County Chapter of The Red Cross, would have been preferable if they had stayed in San Juan, to help these countrymen, as they arrive there. 3:-The task that fell to me was and still is beyond my strength; and the resources received were too modest to equip an office, and to have sufficient employees for such a large and large labor force. Every time EL MUNDO arrived in New York, many Puerto Ricans, some needy and others not, invaded my house, night after night, until one o'clock in the morning. Some making very unfair demands. There have been people whom I have had to threaten with a club, to make them withdraw, because they wanted to receive money anyway, which, according to them, belongs to them, because they are Puerto Ricans, needy or not. On the other hand, some Puerto Ricans, blacks and whites, and being in a bad situation, have shared with other fellow countrymen, the aid received. The Ladies' Committee, especially the ladies América Durecut and Carmen.
> Carmen. María Noa, Bosalina Negrón, and the ladies María Bruno de Coste and Aurea Cintrón de Virella, have also been invaded by a terrible and almost unbearable work. The heroine of the entire campaign, Miss America Durecut, deserves the praise of a saint. - Such is her virtue, see why I hastened to cablegram .when I assumed 05 that the RED CROSS would attend to the request of the Puerto Rico Chapter, and that the "Charity Organization Society" would fulfill the promises of its letter of the 26th. I was guided at the same time, in said cablegram, by the intention, to reassure "our dear people, and that they would thus have a stronger spirit, to face the unfortunate problem of the bubonic plague. The true situation of our unhappy compatriots is as follows: RED CROSS: -Some* of our > countrymen are not satisfied with this Institution. Many persons, whom I have directed to the Chairman of the New York County Chapter of the Red Cross, 119 W. 40 St., to whom, as Mr. del Toro wrote to me on February sixteenth, he has remitted the sum of $612.00 for the relief of needy Puerto Ricans, return to tell me that they have not been able to get any help. CHARITY ORGANIZATION SOCIETY. -Some of my fellow countrymen also come back to visit me to show that they are not satisfied with this institution. I understand that the procedure to which they have to submit is somewhat rough for our countrymen, not because of the Institution, but because of the following: This Institution gives the applicant a "ticket" representing the right to a dormitory in an Asylum of the Institution; another "ticket" represents food, etc.; and I have been told algu■Y.(Continued on p. 31 The Royal Brothers Bookstore has just received a large assortment of works by the best authors Ask for our Catalog of books recently issued P. O. Box 345. Tanca 1. San Juan, P. R.
Maryland Casualty Company Capital and surplus over $7,400,000.00 Headquarters-Baltimore, Md. F. Highlands Burns, President. The Maryland Casualty Company wishes to announce that it has extended its business to Puerto Rico, having appointed as General Agents the firm of COSTA & SANTINI. We cover all kinds of personal accidents, industrial accidents not covered by the Workmen's Compensation law; Boiler, Machinery, Theft, Employees, Public Officials, Administrators, Legal Liability in case of Accidents. Please ask us for information directly or through your Insurance Agent. COSTA & SANTINI Tetuán 20. Telephone 949. Víctor Braegger, Mgr. Ins. Dept.
CIGARROS "SAN JUAN" They are the secret of a tobacco blend exceptionally satisfactory to all smokers. Sold wholesale by Gillies & Woodward, R. Santaella, Porto Rico Drug Co. at retail, in all good stores. Request free samples from the manufacturers. : . INFANZON & RODRIGUEZ . Mayagüez, P. R. . i " i i i 1 - ■ ■ ■ - - -- -- - -
RIBERA CHEVREMONI'S GREAT TRIUMPH IN SPAINi
Our distinguished colleague doa José Pérez Losada, director d* "El Impnrcial" communicated to us yesterday the gnota news of having received from Spain the following cabiegraphic dispatch: Madrid Ib. Pérez Losada, "El Impartía! Ateneo congratulates that country, successful reading of the book: "EL TEMPLO DE DOS ALABASTROS" by Evaristo Ribera Chovreinont. The osndesa of Pardo ( Bazán, Andrés González Blanco, Morenas d* Te jada, Domenech. For us, and for those like us who knew the talent and the creative and imaginative force of the author of "San Juan de la Cruz" and the "Canto de la Madrugada", this triumph of Ribera Chevremont is not a surprise.worship of Art and Beauty, possessing a great temperament and a deep life, it was logical to suppose that the work he did in a larger and more conducive environment as it is for a great artist the Moravian soil t'e Espato, had the acceptance and applause of the critics. Ribera Chevremont is now consecrated in the highest summit of Castilian literature by the greatest geniuses, among them the well-known critic Andrés González Blanco and the emá. nente writer Oondqea de Pardo Bazán. The whole country can feel satisfied with the triumph achieved by this young compatriot, who has been able to play in Spain the role that was entrusted to him as representative of our contemporary lyric poetry, in the highest literary celvacle of our language. DON RAMON GANDIA CORCOVA Mr. d<* Ramon Gandia Cordova has resigned as Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Agriculture and Labor. Mr. Gandía Córdova is one of our most intelligent and valuable intellectuals, having dedicated most of his activities to the investigation and study of those matters related to Agriculture and Ib Physics in general. He is currently president of the physical and mathematical sciences section of the tAeneo, and in the performance of the post he has just resigned, he has always shown great competence and zeal worthy of any enemy. INDIAN GOLETA for SANTO DOMINGO (capital) March 23-1921 Admits cargo and ANTILLES TRADING CO., Telephone 1042-. Office, Marina 14.
TONNOSEMUESIRA SATISFIED
After deliberating the jury that heard the case of Cristóbü Negrún, charged with a crime against public justice and assault and battery, before the Federal Court, returned to the courtroom bringing a verdict of guilty.i the courtroom bringing a nbso lutatory verdict for the accused, with which Judge Hamilton was dissatisfied, stating that the evidence adduced against Negron was straightforward and convincing, and that if he--the Judge--had been the jury, he would have found Negron guilty of the crime with which he was charged. From the evidence there presented it was learned that Negrón, empldido dej mué lie number 2, was summoned on d?Negron refused to be searched by the customs officer in the presence of a brigade of laborers that the former had in his charge, and told him that he was not a customs officer, and that he was not a customs officer, and told him that he was willing to give up his clothes, as long as it was done in the Inspector's office and not in the presence of those men, because he would lose the moral force he had over them. on them. Negron stated that <1 pushed Ornes when the latter put a pistol to his chest. Given the nature of the case, the jury that heard the case gave the benefit of the doubt to the accused, who was acquitted. DON CARLOS CONDE Yesterday returned from his trip to Li Ha baña and the United States the distinguished gentleman Don Carlos Conde, vulioso social element that has conquered in Puerto Rico, by his recimientiJs and his exquisite proceeding, great sympathies and affections. Mr. Conde was managing important matters related to the commercial house "Villar y Go. Inc.," which enjoys so much credit in the country and of which he is one of the directors. SUGAR PRICE HAS BEEN FIXED New York Cable: "Cuba Committee fixed price $52" sugar from that island; this price is equivalent to $6 27 sugar Puerto Rico. We repair cash registers, adding machines, typewriters, phonographs, mimiographs. OJEDA BROS. Box 1031. San Juan, P. R. San José No. 6. Phone 355.
Sale "Pre - Inventory" (Clothing for Ladies).
Kimonas $2.50 $1.49 $3.00 $1.98 $4.00 $2.48 Variety in colors and styles Brassiere in Justillo and Boudeau shape at 59c., 98 c. and $1.19 Their value $1.00, $1.50 and $2.00
White Etamine Blouses $1.13 The $2.00 and $2.50 to $1.98 Middies For girls value $2.00 to 98 c. GONZALEZ PADIN CO. San Juan, P. R.
Sweaters Sleeveless in wool and silk $1.98 - $1 48 - $3.98 Value: $5.00, $7.00 and $10.00. Girls' Sleep Shirts from $l.C' to 69c. Those from $1 .50 to , 98 c. VEST "from 30 c. to 19 c. VEST from 50 c. to 30 c.
THE APPOINTMENT OF THE GOVERNOR OF PUERTO RICO
I ' ANOTHER WASHINGTON LETTER Yesterday we gathered from the political circuits of this capital reliable reports that a letter has been received from Washington/ stating a>ignu that the Harding will not at present make any appointment i to the office of Governor of Pio. Ri o, until such time as he has carefully studied the political situation and general conditions of the island. However. die® the cario, there are so many as pímntel; quo there are at present pa ¡ ra for the aforementioned post and it is 3 1 the nr uion qve been cj-rciendo cer1 ca </-! President, it would not be surprising if the appointment were to be made at any moment. R among the candidates there are, .'pe.r . of what endo® ra the Unió ñuta party, are Mr, Riley, who announced ay r the associated press, General ¡ )- dward and Genci .l Darling. Of all these candidates the one with the most prot bilities so far is U ú'timo, qm is from Ma sachtsetts, a close friend of gobirnad'r Cox, who replaced vice-pres;dent Ctalidge, and there is nothing strange about it (Oonttnfia eu U pama* 3.) fíMoí THE CABELLO WIZARD Notice to Taxpayers The Collectors d" Internal Revenue of the is(a have been instructed NOT TO ACCEPT CHECKS gn p¿gorda-contributions on property or on income or any other contributions, UNLESS SUCH CHECKS ARE DULY CERTIFIED BY THE BANK AGAINST WHICH THEY WERE ISSUED. JOSE E. BENEDICTO. Treasurer of Puerto Rico. To the Commerce of Puerto Rico i Veiga and Rodriguez, offer a loI cal expressly for liquidation ie goods in. general, in San Sebastian 24, Esq. Plaza Mercado, opposite the Bosque de Bolonia Consignments are accepted, under commission basis, providing the best" gnrantías -Box 937.-Telephone 663. San Juan Advt i-i It is plating and lining buttons. ¡ A CARAZO, Brau St 72.