ELMÜNDO
8 page" 3 ctv". Ssmsstrs, $4.00 One year,$7.50
Office": Salvador Brau, 81 i Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING PAPER,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
PabUebeé áUtrib.Wd u4 "r parwlt Ule. 801) by "be Aet "i O, 1 "U, ob ále a* the Post Offtea of tu Je*n. Porto Bise. By erásr ef the PreeMent, A. B. Bar Latvian. Posmester General. Bntaret as seeond elees matter, febraary 81 1818. at théz Post Oféee at Bap Jasa, Porto y eo. united Btatee of Amerfta wn|er the Aet ef mfroh 8, 18V8.
SATURDAY, MAY 28, 1921.
ARO III
8AN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
NUMBER 672.
A fight to the death has broken out in Ireland.
The fires have been set in the farms in the area and have been attributed to the "sinn feiers". Despite the resumption of the Irish peace negotiations, a terrible violence on the part of the Sinn Feiners, with many people killed and property destroyed, has inundated Ireland and part of England at the end of the week. Attempt on Minister The Dublin correspondent of the "Daily Chronicle" reveals that an assassination attempt was made in Dublin on Sir Hamor Greenwood, Secretary for Ireland in the British Cabinet. Several shots were fired at the car, but Hamar was not occupying it at the time. The British official said he had already been warned of the plot against his life. Several raids have been made in Scotland as a result of "sinn feiners" activities. Secret Service agents penetrated the premises of the "Iri h Self Determination League" and seized documents which they described as being of the greatest importance. Three arrests were made and a police cordon was then established around the offices. Masked armed men were described by the police as "Irish terrorists" who invaded houses in Liverpool and the surrounding area, where they believed relatives of individuals in the service of the crown were living. O 'CALLAGHAN MURDERED Father O 'Callaghan, a member of the clergy attacked in Cork Cathedral, was killed in his own bedroom at four o'clock in the morning. Also killed near Tipperary were Police Inspector Giggs and a woman accompanying him. In addition; two constables, three sergeants and several policemen, plus two sailors, who were judged spies by the sinn feiners.
By DANIEL OCONEELL S. Staff Correspondent.
I DUBLIN, May 20.-The greatest offensive launched by the Republican army is in pro. gression and news reports say that the fighting continues violent in several par* es. The west of Ireland is burning with the expected guerrilla warfare of the "sinn fcincfs'' against the crown forces. Several battles are reported in southern Ireland. Losses to Crown forces in the west are considerable, where they have been the target of many ambushes. British soldiers are retaliating and many Sinn Feiners' homes have been burned. DUBLIN, May 20.-27 persons were killed at the end of the week and 19 wounded, many of whom were taken from their homes and shot in cold blood. Three British officers and a woman were killed during an ambush by Sinn Feiners on a motor car at Ballyturn. A police detachment was attacked on its way to the scene. Inspector Blake and his mistress, Captain Corwallis and Lieutenant McOreery were shot dead. A constable was fatally wounded in the struggle that followed the ambush. The Sinn Feiners launched an organized attack on Cork Prison but were repulsed after an hour of fighting during which machine-gun and rifle fire was launched at the attackers from the prison walls. By WILLIAM L. MALLABAR LONDON, N.J. May.-There are reports from Rieshire, Scotland, that he has been executed by the British authorities.
FINLAY WAYMOUTH & LEE, INC. They inform their clients and friends, that as from the first of June, the General Offices of the Corporation, and the Departments of Lumber, Insurance and Office Equipment, will be installed in their new building located in "La Ma "ina", San Juan, Isabel II Street No. 6.
THIS AFTERNOON'S ATHLETIC GAMES The excitement that reigns in the schools of the island to attend these interesting games is great. The schools of the island have placed a large order for tickets, which highlights the enthusiasm with which the idea of these games has been received, given the competence of the intelligent jury, which is composed of great experts in athletics. The University, the "High" and other high schools of the island, will be in tomorrow's games representing the above mentioned schools. The Labra School, the Baldorioty School, the Boy's Charity School, the Carolina School and St. Augustine's Academy are anxiously waiting for the time of these hard-fought games to see who will be the winner.
SOLEMN CORPUS CHRISTI PROCESSION Next Sunday, at five o'clock in the afternoon, will leave our Holy Cathedral Church, with the usual solemnity, the procession of the Most Holy Corpus Christi, which will travel the route of the tomb. For this act of our faith and of our traditions, the general public is invited, so that, as in previous years, the society of San Juan may pay homage to the King of Kings with their love and their faith.
[QUESO, Legitimate of Arecibo. Ven- , do wholesale. I need a Distributing Agent for the District of San Juan. L Pedro Orpi Café "Baleares". Arecibo, Puerto Rico.
f EH1 fl BEL HIPOBROMÍ) BAILES Thursday, Saturday and Sunday. LOS PARRAS Saturday and Sunday. DAILY MOVIES AND OTHER SHOWS
To Santo Domingo The fast schooner W. H. Maddy will leave on Tuesday for Jos ports of LA ROMANA, MACORIS and SANTO DOMINGO, carrying cargo and passengers. Inquiries: % DIEGO AGUEROS & Co, Agents.
uw visrm I LONDON SOON
T- ' ! ! COPENHAGEN, May 27.-Reports i precedents from E tocolmo say that the head of the Russian government, Nicholas Leníne, will embark early in June a. In. glatena, and ¡will take with him ten mijn. neg of pounds sterling for the raanudi cion ''trade between the Rustí ";io. víct" and the United Kingdom. j It is also assured in this <'idsd qne'Kras in qni?r will conceal the vtije <e Leníne, saying that it is not'he and not Lento? -LZ.S EXCAVATIONS BEGIN IN THE HOLY LAND i RONM> May dócttrr Clarence Fisher- of the University of Pénsilva. r.ia, has begun excavations in the ' cerc$ttfa% of the Jordan River, in the valley of ¡ Isdrealon, in order to unearth the ancient city mentioned in the Old Testament and known par Be*h Shan. Dr. Fisher hopes to find the ruins of the seven most famous ancient cities of this region, with the purpose of demonstrating that there were different kinds of civilization among them. I A CONFLICT MAY ARISE BETWEEN MEXICO AND CHINA , j 1 HONG KONG, May 26.-The government of Peking is preparing to send a note' I to the Mexican government, for having taken the same position against Chinese emigration as the United States did against the Mexican public, Mr. Elias Callis, the Secretary of the Interior of the Mexican public, Mr. Elias Callis, who has been a member of the Mexican government. Elias Calles, in the note he has sent to the Emigration officials in Aguas Prieta, says that very energetic measures are urgently needed in order to avoid the flow of Chinese into Mexican territory. PARIS, May 27.-The latest news from Upper Silesia says that the situation there is becoming more satisfactory every day, but they add that all the railroad personnel, who are German, are still on strike, with the purpose of starving the Poles to death. Today, May 28, is the third anniversary of the seizure of Cantigny by American troops who took part in the European conflagration. Tomorrow, Sunday, May 29, it will be nine years since the Jones bill was read in the Congress of the Republic, to provide a civil government for Puer to Rico and for other purposes. The bill, as will be remembered, was the product of a titanic struggle initiated by Mr. Larrinaga and the commissions of Puerto Rico in nineteen hundred and nineteen, and continued by Muñoz Rivera I in nineteen hundred and eleven, and chao. .perated by the speaker of the House, Don José de Diego.
Who is Ad-el-ite? This is the throbbing question of* rila that daily arises in the street, in the Cinema, in the Theater, in the Casino and in all parts of the city. If on June 15 no one knows WHO AD-EL-ITE IS, this famous bandit will be publicly handed over to the police in one of the city's cinemas and the $25.00 check offered by the Cllvilles Hardware Store to the person who finds out WHO AD-EL-ITE IS will be raffled among those present. AD-EL-ITE will be visiting Ülivilles Hardware today, try to chase him down. IF YOU NEED Galvanized corrugated iron Galvanized barbed wire Twisted square rods General lumber. Call Compañía Industrial de Santurce PEDRO BOLIVAR, S. en C. Phone 425. P.O. Box 250. SAN JUAN. Advt
CURRENT STATE OF BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
The president of the statistics committee of the chamber of commerce is not optimistic. PARALYZATION DEPENDS ON OVERABUNDANCE - Markets needed for agricultural and mining overproduction. 1 WASHINGTON, May 15- Archer ' Wall Dcuglas, chairman of the committee on statistics and patterns of the U.S. Chamber 1 of commerce, of clear in his monthly magazine do business in the United States, that es. tes are at a good.level but not bas. so high. The great mass of the people are looking at the facts in this way," he says. There is no illusion of a sudden return to prosperity, no rise in prices, no shortage in any industry. There is a realization that it will take both time and patience to solve the problems confronting us. Many have accepted the situation and are adapting to the inevitable, i.e. to the progress made in the way of readjustment. In many of the large centers there is the curious paradox of a lack of jobs accompanied by growing savings. The explanation seems to be that of those who are employed none are sure of their labors and consequently throw caution to the wind in the form of lower expenses. "The farmer's financial position is stronger as he liquidates his obligations, lowers his cost of production, and finds more economic methods of distribution, largely through cooperative associations.
Astronomer q, succeeded in discovering some 27 stars Communicate from New York that the celebrated astronomer Dr. W. R Brooks, who for many years was the Professor of Astronomy at "llobirt College," has died. Brooks, after the great astronomer Pons, has discovered the most comets (27 comets) of all. Dr. Brooks was born in England in 1844 and made at the age of 14 his first telescope, and although it was not quite perfect, he was able to see the great comet Donati in 1858. At the age of 17 he gave his first lecture on astronomy, in London. At the age of 21 he was employed in an iron works in Buffalo, where he was able in time to make very good astronomical apparatus of his own manufacture. When he finished his third astronomical instrument, in 1881, he discovered his first comet. He built his first observatory at. Phelps, New York, and it was here that he discovered 11 cornettes. In 1888 he moved to Genoa, N.Y., where he took charge of Smith's Astronomical Observatory, having discovered 16 more comets. The last one covered was on October 21, 1912. The most famous of this astronomer, was that while all the astronomers of the world were scanning the space looking for the comet discovered by Pons, in 1812, Mr. Brooks was the first one who, in 1883, warned the world of the return of the mysterious comet, which will visit us next June. RENTED At the TOBACCO PALACE, a large premises, suitable for offices; (at present occupied by Messrs. Wm. M. Garic and Oo.), for 1 reports:: ALONSO RIERA and Co, . Telephone 527. San Juan, P. R. Advt.
BLOODY SUCE- ... ■ SO IN AIBONITO.
*Yesterday afternoon we received from our active and diligent special correspondent in Aibonito, Mr. Rrmón Véle? the following telegram: "Aibonito, May 27, 1921. EL MUNDO, San Juan. I Personal disagreement between Manuel Al l'varez and Juan Gómez, they shot at each other, wounding both Cam ¡ pesino was passing through the scene wounded very well. Condition all serious. By mail official informationRamón VELEZ, Special Correspondent". Innaedi itamwitp we got in co m location with our correspondent in Aibonito, who supplied us with the following interest before details of the su -cess; . THE PROTAGONISTS. The main protagonists of the tragedy that concerns us are two well-known Persians in Aibonito, of very good standing, esteemed in all respects and who enjoyed a great reputation there. Don Manuel Alvarez, 40 years of age, is a merchant of that town, owner of a café located on the main street, that is, San Jose Street, of that town, and is also the agent in Aibonito of the "Blue Line", which is a car agency that makes daily trips between Sin Juan and PohceDon Juan Gomez, is about 30 years of age, and is the administrator of Don Manuel Aponte, a rich farmer and landowner of that region. BUSINESS MATTERS. Although we have not yet been given the motives that gave origin to the encounter that took place between the two señares, it is assured that between them it seems that confcvciale/, -".Igun-i disagreement ' in which, motivated the displeasure between them. >.. THE MOMENT OF THE TRAGEDY As it was, Mr. Alvarez and Mr. Gomez met yesterday in the street, in front of the former's establishment, and engaged in an argument, which was ; heating up at times, until both drew their revolvers, firing two shots each 'uro or wounding each other. A PEASANT WAS WOUNDED. In the midst of the brawl, an unhappy peasant named Abad Crt;z, a native of Barranquitas, happened to pass by the place and was hit by one of the bullets fired. The condition of the three wounded is very serious, and it is feared that at any moment a fatal outcome may occur Mr. Alvarez received a bullet in the upper part of the groin, with exit wound; Mr. Gomez, received one in the forehead, above the left ear; and the champion, Abad Ortiz, received one in the es (Continued on page 6).
VICTORY G-IROEN TODAY!- Extraordinary -TODAY! IíWd in the famous comedy in 8 acts. PAPAITO, PIERNAS J.ÁRCAS DADDY LOÑG LEGS ENGLISH AND SPANISH TITLES FOR SALE "SKINNER" STEAM MACHINE 14 x 15 COMPLETELY NEW For reports,* C. C. Box 875. San Juan, P. R. - - - ■■■■ - -- Plies and lines buttons. A CARAZO, Brau Yes. 72. Advt.
Germany delivers to the Allies a respectable amount.
BERLIN, Wed. 27-The German Government will deliver tomorrow, I know, to the War Indemnity Commission in Paris, 20 Treasury bonds of 10 million dollars each, equivalent to 840 million marks, gold, as agreed upon in one of the clauses of the peace treaty. The bonds have been guaranteed by the most prominent German bankers. Of this sum, 80 million will be paid in New York and 60 million in London and Pafts. The German Government, on the other hand, has sent the Under-Secretary of the Interior, Freund, to the Upper Silesian frontier; with unlimited powers to take such stringent measures as may be indispensable to prevent German rifle corps from crossing the Iron Curtain. PARIS, May 27.-M- Klotz, former Minister of Finance in the government which was presided over by Clemenceau, strongly attacked the M. Briand government, for not having yet adopted energetic dispositions to get Germany to fulfill the aspirations of the French nation, relative to the fulfillment of the Treaty. - Klotz also attacked the economic clauses which were granted in London, and accused the English High B inca of having stubbornly opposed the entry of the French army into the Ruhr metallurgical basin. He deplored the fact that France had not also adopted another vigorous resolution concerning the payment of twelve billion marks, which the Compensation Commission had ordered Germany to deliver on the first day of this year. BRIAND DEFENDS LONDON TREATY PARIS, May 27. Briand defended with extraordinary energy the London agreement and the decision of the Compensation Commission concerning the payment of the twelve billion referred to. He added that if the House approves the proposal of Mr. Klotz, which tends to censure the work of the said Compensation Commission, the Government would irrevocably resign because it is convinced that it has proceeded with firmness and rectitude, in agreement with the Allies, and without sacrificing, in any way, the interests of France. The first part of the agenda, which declares that the "ultimatum" of London offers the least possible amount of guarantees, was approved by 403 votes to 103. The second part, which asks that a vote of confidence be given to the Government, by imposing disarmament on Germany, full payment and the immediate application of sanctions, if it fails to pay a part of all that is demanded of the defeated nation, was approved by 390 votes to 162. Mr. Arago considers that London's ultimatum means the indispensable minimum for the security of France, and affirms that he has full confidence that the Government will be very firm with the former German Empire, not only as regards the payment of the required indemnities, but also as regards Silesia.
American Railroad Company of Porto Rico Some of our personnel having voluntarily abandoned their work, we need mechanics, engineers and stokers with certificates of competence and good conduct, for immediate permanent employment. No further applications will be accepted for Stationmasters as the number of applicants who can be instructed in the evening classes is too large. Applications should be addressed to the undersigned. Emilio S. Jimenez Gen. Manager, American Railroad Co.
PARIS, May 27.-In reply to some interpretations M. Briand has stated on the rostrum of the Chamber the French point of view in regard to the very serious question which has arisen in Upper Silesia. He declared that the Supreme Peace Council can only adopt a solution in accordance with justice. He was in favor of sending legal experts to study the situation in accordance with the clauses of the Treaty of Versailles and to formulate proposals which should lead to a definitive settlement. The French point of view is that the mining region which, during the plebiscite, voted in favor of Poland, should be annexed to Poland. Wirth, the new Chancellor of Germany, held a very important conference with the French Ambassador concerning the fulfillment of the promises made by his nation. The said Chancellor has made some statements in the Berlin press, according to which he describes the speech delivered in the French Chamber by M. Briand as very moderate. The Chancellor energetically denies the rights of Poland over Silesia and assures that he is confident that the disputed territory will definitely pass into the hands of the GermansThe newspapers of Rome, particularly the unofficial ones, pay warm phrases to the moderation, calmness and precision to the declarations made by M- BriandDRAJMATIC COMPANY WILL ARRIVE ON JUNE 5Our colleague Mr. A Bozo received yesterday the cablegram .fHguent. "We will arrive at S*n Juan on the 5th, on the steamer "Philadelphia". Delgado CARO." DOÑA MARIA HERNANDEZ HERNANDEZ USERA DE GONZALEZ Just returned from the United States and is again among us the respectable and distinguished lady Doña Ana Maria Hernandez Usera do Gonzalez, accompanied by her son Ramon. . The esteemed lady, as soon as she learned of the accident suffered by her husband, the wealthy and prominent member of the Spanish colony Don Manuel Gonzalez, left for Puerto Rico, to be at the bedside of her loving husband EL MUNDO in offering its respects and greetings to Mrs. Hernandez Usera de Gonzalez, vows that she will have the satisfaction of seeing her husband completely recovered from the ailment that keeps him sick as soon as possible.
r '- ■ A Story of Adventure and Love in the Super Drama "Rio Arriba" by the famous actor Lewis Stone -We guarantee success.