ELMUNDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
Office*: Salvador Brau, 81 Tai. 833 P. 0. Box 345
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
DAILY MORNING JOURNAL,
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
ÍPuMlahad and "MribaMd aader permit (Mo. 801) satMori"®.' by u. of oeSoUr 6, 181T, oa áte at sha Poo" OíAm ai Ban Joan. Porto Rico. By order 9t the pTmidant, A. 8. laeon. Poumaeter General. Bntered aa loeond elaee matter, f.braary >1. 1818. at the Poet Office at Ben Juan, M eq, United Btatee of Amarle, andar the Act ot march >■ 18T8 '
SATURDAY, APRIL 30, 1921.
NUMBER 676.
Today the fate of Germany is decided.
(BY FRENCH CABLE, PARIS, April 29.-There is lively enthusiasm in this capital to know the result of the long wait endured by the Allied nations, for tomorrow is the day fixed in the course of the London conferences to decide the fate of Germany. In the regions of occupation, French, British and Belgian troops are preparing to move very quickly to occupy the whole of Germany, including Berlin. The Parisian newspapers judge the attitude of the former Empire and believe that it is not possible to wait any longer, since the defeated nation is making a mockery of the benevolence of France, given that the Government of the Republic has done everything in its power to definitively establish peace in Europe, which Germany has not helped with its protests, delays and notes. If Germany does not deliver the 23 billion marks, gold, requested by the Allies, for the first time in its history foreign troops will occupy its territory, "Le Petit Parisien" believes that Germany should not commit the enormous folly of not paying the debt. Le Matin" says that the indemnities demanded by the Allies are not demanded by the victors, but by the sisters of the vanquished nation, and that they represent, even as victors, the heaviest burden that any of the nations that took part in the world conflagration can suffer. PARIS, April 29.- The wagon in which the armistice was signed on November 11, November 11, 18, was taken to the Hotel des Invalides. The wagon will be exhibited on Thursday, the 100th anniversary of the signing of the armistice. The wagon will be exhibited on Thursday, the centenary of the death of Napoleon Bonaparte. GERMANY CALLS FOR THE SU- , PRESSURE OF THE SANCTIONS LONDON, April 28.- Germany is calling for the removal of the sanctions proposed at the conferences in this city.
The Porto Rico Railway Light & Power Company will pay the sum of One Hundred Dollars, ($100.00) as a gratuity to the person who furnishes sufficient information for the arrest and prosecution of any person or persons who cause, damage or attempt to cause damage to or destroy property of this Company, or who hinder or attempt to hinder the movement of electric cars. MANUEL V. DOMENECH General Manager. We hereby notify all interested parties that we have been unable to reach an agreement with the Workers' Committee as to the manner of dividing the work equally among the operators who previously worked in those departments where there was an excess of personnel. The representatives of the workers' representatives forcibly suspended all work in the departments where they had started to work, which is completely contrary to what was agreed and which nullifies the agreement concluded last year. We are prepared to give work to about half of the personnel who previously worked in our factories, PAYING THE SAME PREVIOUS WAGES AND GUARANTEEING THEM CONSTANT WORK AT THE SAME TIME, and we instruct all the workers who wish to work to go directly to the Managers of the various factories, who are authorized to open the workshops provided that a sufficient number of workers are present to justify the resumption of work. Porto Rican American Tobacco Co. of P. R. San Juan, P. R., April 7, 1921.
Another case of bubonic plague in Carolina.
- Yesterday Dr. Ortiz went to Carolina with Dr. Lavandero, who examined the girl Mar ir M Fragoso, eleven years old, who had been reported to the Health Department by Dr. Trillas, as a suspected case of bubonic plague. The doctors carefully examined the patient, who had hare in one groin, and on their return to this city reported that the patient had all the clinical symptoms of the epidemic, so they believed it was essential to admit her immediately to the "Cuaretenario" hospital. Shortly after, the Ambulance Park Carolina left, and the girl was admitted to the hospital at ten o'clock in the morning. With the above-mentioned case, there are now 4 registered in Carolina, with the aggravating factor that this case was registered at some distance from the place where the first three occurred. Today in the morning the active doctor Ortiz will go to Carolina, who will initiate a careful investigation about the case, to determine the relationship that may exist between it and those previously denounced. This new case of bubonic plague has again alarmed the inhabitants of Carolina, whose fear of the possibility of more attacks is growing by the minute. WASHINGTON CABLEGRAM Judge Hamilton, of the Federal Court, received yesterday a cablegram from Washington, begging him to remain at the head of that Court, in the interim of the arrival on the island of the new judge, appointed by the President, who will be here about the fifth of next month. i -SL NEW FRENCH CONSUL" Yesterday was presented to Mr. Barceló, President of the Senate, by Mr. Ives du Courthial, Consul of France in this ' capital until recently, Mr. Dominique Forcioli, who comes to the island, to replace Mr. du Courthial, in the diplomatic representation held by I ba. The presentation was official and Mr. Forcioli was also introduced to the speaker of the House.
INTENSISIMAL LIGHT, MORE BfllLLANIE.OJE THAN THAT OF THE KING ASTRO, WILL ILLUMINATE THE EARTH ON THE NIGHT OF JUNE 24, WHEN THE COME-; TARIA Tail RESTALS ITS INCANDESCENT GASES OVER OUR PLANET
AND WHILE CHRISTIANITY CELEBRATES THE FEAST OF THE HOLY BAPTIST, THE MOST EXTRAORDINARY AND SURPRISING SPECTACLE WILL BE OFFERED, 4, On June 24 next, when it is believed that they will not produce any catastrophe "It must be understood that the collision ¡hra the feast of the Baptist, the earth cho and will only envelop a good part announced will not produce any cataclysm with a large comet that will produce a huge cloud of our planet in a huge cloud clism on the earth, This will take place, as if they were much larger and more solid than the Pons-Winicke comet, and the collision will take place if the predictions of the Pons-Winicke comet are not mistaken. The phenomenon which will actually occur between the two will be like a collision between the predictions of the British astronomer, Mr. A. C. D. D. The predictions of Mr. Crome- a granite rock and an acariCromelin zephyr, of the Royal Observatory at Green Un, will be beautiful. The part of the giver." wich, who has sent the result of land that is veg tgblerta by -the fits Mr. Jacoby adds, that the Pons-Wi-his observations to all the great cb llera of the traveler will be illuminated nicke, as well as all comets, is
The two astronomers announce that the northernmost countries will be the most fortunate, because their inhabitants will be brighter than those of the rest of the world. Although the announced collision of the earth with the Pons-Winicke is almost two months away, preparations are already being made by numerous astronomers to travel to points in the North, in order to observe it in detail and make extensive studies on the consequences that it produces in the earth's atmosphere. Not only the astronomers are planning to go to admire the most beautiful spectacle, but many people in Europe and the United States are also making preparations to be in the most favorable places on June 24, when the collision of the earth with the Pons.Winicke will take place. The Americans, as usual, are proving to be the most enthusiastic to make this scientific excursion, and in various parts of the United States companies have been organized with no other object than to organize excursions to the North to witness the arrival of the wanderer of the firmament, which will make a visit to the earth on the day that San Juan de Puerto Rico celebrates the feast of its patron saint. (Continued on page 6.) "America" Theater - TODAY AND TOMORROW - The biggest hit of the season - "LA TROUPPE PACHECO" - With new and difficult numbers of - - Variety. - THE BEST THAT HAS EVER VISITED US - - Don't miss this opportunity - - to meet a - - GREAT SHOW - Clowns, Contortions. Flights, Death Jumps, Balancing, Alambrólas, Canzonetistas, The Most Sensational. -The Greatest - - P-R-E-C-l-O-S - - 50 and 30 cents lunette. - CINEMA AND VARIETY ACTS CINEMA BUTCHES We will sell over the dock 360 bu. new tacas, just received from U. S. BRUNO A GONZALEZ. San Juan, P. R. Advt. 5e seeks expert bookkeeper for office manager and with experience in accounting for sugar mills. Good opportunity. Address to P.O. Box 355, Mayagüez, P. R. Advt.
the part of the earth covered by the celestial traveler's light will be illuminated as it has never been seen before. The intensity of that light, according to the astronomer, will be such that even the rays of the sun will not be able to surpass it. -
The astronomical laboratories of the United States and Europe. According to the studies of the English astronomer, the comet in question will pass through the orbit of the earth precisely on June 24, by which time we will be at the same point. The wise man judges that the collision between our planet and the mysterious space traveler will be inevitable. The comet, named after the sage Pons-Winicke, who discovered it half a century ago, is a star that appears in the firmament and can be seen with the naked eye every five and three quarters years. This year will be the first time that this star can not only be perfectly seen, but its tail can be observed in detail. The wise Cromelin announces that as the comet approaches the earth, it will be visible in a great tension and that the tail will gradually increase in volume and brilliance. By the first days of June, the comet will be very close to the earth, and will therefore be visible in plain view from various portions of the world we inhabit. For the eighteenth or twentieth, the astronomer predicts that the tail or hair of the wandering star will have a great extension and that it will be a hermesisimo spectacle to observe it in space. Mr. Cromelin says that even if the collision is inevitable, there is no cause for alarm, as the cauda of the star is only fermada by gaseous matters TODAY SUCCESS TODAY 1 At 5 o'clock in the afternoon GRAN TANDA ARISTOCRATICA i RESURRECCION QUIJANO La Reina del CupléWill work only in that tanda, 1 premiering new cuplés and topical songs and the premiere in ' Puerto Rico '"En las Garras del Jaguar*' Drama in 5 acts, with SESSUE HAYAKAWA FRITZY BRUNETTE, TOM MOORE, MAJORIE DAW TANDA ARISTOCRATICA 85 and 15 1 The usual four tandas. CURRENT PRICES. _ 1 Warehouse for Quincallers | i ? X t We have just received an ex- X X X tense assortment of Laces, Knitwear and Quincalla in * X general. X X We dispatch orders by X X X C.O.D. f X Succession of . X J ROQUE GONZALEZ & Co-, ¿ X Cruz No- 10. P.O. Box 456. 4 X San Juan, P. R. X v v v
- Uf seen. There will be no nights there for the duration of the phenomenon, and the phosphorescent light from the comet's tail will make the nights seem like days. The intensity of the light, according to the astronomer, will be such that even the sun's own rays will not be able to penetrate it " * M ' . 5 Apart from -eatlt"<tn<ftrÍéilB, Xse espféa i that other of singular importance for science and that will be observed by numerous astronomers who are already preparing to undertake the journey to the places where it is believed that the cau da cover the earth. Not only has the wise Mr. Cr:melin ■ announced the presence of this wandering star, but other astronomers of note have done likewise. Professor Harold Jacoby, of the Department of Astronomy at Columbia University in the United States, has observed the presence of the star, and has stated that there is no reason for the inhabitants of the earth to be alarmed, even if the collision announced by Mr. Cromelin takes place on the day on which the feast of the Baptist is celebrated. Professor Jacoby's comforting explanation, he himself puts it as follows: i 'MHlimtUHHIWmiHIIIU'OIHiHHHMtfUHMMIHMim .S.tMS "*""---<<< We have for sale five used BUICK cars, the owners of which have ordered new cars. Each of these wagons is in excellent condition and ■ 'us prices range from $1,200 to $1,500 making this a bargain deal. i There are 4 five-passenger BUICKS; one 1920 model, two I 1919, one 1918 and one 1919 seven-passenger model. I In addition to these BUICKS we have the following used cars: 1 Essex, two months old, $1,500. 1 Haynes, $700. 1 Hudson, 1917, seven passenger, $1,350. 1 Chevrolet used only as a demonstrator, $850. Santiago A. Panzardi, Inc., SAN JUAN, plating and button lining, CARAZO, Brau St. 72, Advt.
A messenger from Mr. Pershing to M. Viviani
(FOR CABLE FRANCE®) PARIS, April 29.-General Pershing has addressed to M. Viviani a message in which he emphasizes The en. tusiastic farewell of the cane devil, as well as the good will of France, who fought for the sole purpose of securing the welfare of mankind. 4 PARIS, April 28.- In authorized circles it is said that the new figures proposed by Germany are laughable*, since they constitute 100,000,000,000,000 marks less than those proposed in Paris, which they considered as the minimum. Germany offers to give 1,000,000,000,000 marks, gold, and that they are obliged to settle 1* debt of 12,000,000,000,000 mtfcos, * r.o disbursed in the first installment of 20,000,000,000,000. In addition, the former Empire offers to participate in the restoration of The devastated regio, nes, and to replace the debt contracted by the Allies with the Es- < tates United States. NEW YORK, April 20-The G dians of this city announce an international conference sponsored by/the "Association of for the purpose of boosting exports. . 4 All businessmen in the United States are eagerly awaiting the resumption of export and import trade. J Representatives of more than thirty nations will attend this splendid event, and the main purpose will be to discuss and discuss the relation of world commercial interests to manufacturing in this country. > - ■ Unless prevented by Qt*s #at|. Hughes will preside over the opening session du rduring which it is expected that several speeches of great interest will be pror.nn cieu related to the inter t national exchange of products. The representatives of the former foreign countries will endeavor to advise those present as to the best methods in each case of facilitating the United States in the exchange of cerner cial goods with their respective countries. The question of the exchange of goods with Europe and the South American countries will be discussed at length. Europe and the South American countries. Inos, both as regards raw materials and manufactured goods, as well as credit and other economic matters, will be discussed at length.
OPEN LETTER To the general public: We are pleased to inform the people of San Juan that as of this date we have opened our retail department in Tanca Street No. 4, where we will quote the most advantageous prices for articles of our branches, we offer to contractors or anyone who may be interested, iron rods, paints, nails, tools, hardware and plumbing fixtures at situation prices. We offer rare families all kinds of kitchen utensils. German enameled iron of superior quality and cutlery at the most advantageous prices that can be offered. Perfumery and kitchenware at bargain prices. Don't forget to pay a visit to the one who offers to protect your interests by selling you good and cheap. Our motto is: 'BY PROTECTING THE PEOPLE WE WILL GET OUR OWN PROTECTION'. ' Visit us soon, we want to protect you, CLIVILLÉS Hardware. . 5 Tanca 4. Í TOS FERINA í :j: There are ways to prevent yourself from such an annoying, long and dangerous evil. Protect your children, have them injected with pre- X ventive and immunizing vaccine. We have it fresh, and especially X of the reputable brand SQUIBB. PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY OF PORTO RICO X STOP 15, SANTURCE, P. R.
May Queen at the "Royal" school
This afternoon at 5 o'clock will close the contest to elect a May Queen at the RoyaJ Gregg School. The results of yesterday's canvass are as follows: i 1. Providencia Calderon, 10,646 2- Carmen Adams, 8,350 3. Camelia Ortiz, 6,046 4. Susana Garcia, 4,769 5. PomftEnza Cruz, 3,500 6. Maria L- Rivera, 2,820 7. Otilia Estrada, 2,633 8. María A. Fernández, 1,369 The jury will be composed of Salvador Font, José Rechany and R. Romeu. All candidates and interested parties are invited. DON ANTONIO GOMEZ Coming from the Dominican Republic, where he has worked with magnificent success for two months, returned yesterday our very dear friend the excellent gentleman Don Antonio Gomez, representative of the very reputable firm "Frederick Stearns Co" of Detroit (Michigan). Mr. Gomez, as we say, did great business, as always happens to him, since they facilitate and shorten his work, more and more, not only the superior products of the respectable firm represented by you, but also the prestige and the numerous sympathies that such a good representative has always enjoyed. We send Mr. Gómez our most affectionate greetings. DON BALTASAR FERNANDEZ In the next Spanish mail, will embark for Spain the very excellent gentleman Don Baltasar Fernandez, who is accompanied by his distinguished wife dM" .RtaftCAjQwy" Fernandez and his son, who is going to pursue a career, for which he has plenty of ti. slow and vast aptitudes, in the Mother Country. The highly esteemed family, who leave numerous friends in Puerto Rico, will be absent for some years in the old metropolis. After visiting Madrid, they will go to Auturias where they will take up residence. As general proxy of their goods in Puerto Rico, remains the very cultured and esteemed gentleman Don Jose Perez Fernandez, well known for his excellent and noble conduct throughout the island. We are pleased to wish a happy trip and pleasant impressions in Spain to the distinguished Cerra Fernán-,