THE WORLD
8 pigfnis 3 3 Semester, $4.00 Á One year,$7.50
¿ t Offices:. r | Salvador Brau, 8T ~ ; Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345 ]
p MORNING DAILY.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
The article of the 'League of Nations' revisited.
(POB CABLE FRENCH) GENEVA, September 9.- The Committee on Amendments to the Covenant has taken up the examination of Canada's proposal for the deletion of Article 10, which was requested by North America. According to this article, the armed intervention of the nations forming the partnership was required in case one of them was attacked. The French delegation requested that the pact be kept intact, without any amendment, until the opinion of the United States on the "Society of the Nations" was known. Balfour proposed that the article be sent to the Commission of Jurisconsults, for interpretation. A NOTE FROM THE UNITED STATES TO THE "SOCIETY" GENEVA, September 9.- The Council of the "League of Nations" has received a communication from the United States to the Allies concerning the mandate of the island of Tap. This note constitutes a new progress in the course of negotiations as indicated by Mr. Da Cunha. He has decided that it is not intended to intervene, but to ask the United States to hasten the negotiations on the definition by the Council of the forms of the mandate. Mr. Noblemaire, French delegate to the League of Nations, has submitted to the Disarmament Commission the proposal of Mr. Leon Bourgeois, showing that the French government has not changed its mind on the question of such disarmament. France did not gladly play the role of gendarme imposed on it by circumstances, nor has it ceased to affirm that it will enter on the road to disarmament when certain conditions indispensable to its security are fulfilled. The Conference on Disarmament adopted in principle the proposal of Mr. Jouhaux, concerning the possible convening of an international conference on the suppression and "control" of armaments. AH America Cables, which has just established its new cable line to New York with connections in Cuba for Central and South America, . applies to all its customers in Puerto Rico to register their addresses at the offices of AH America Cables, in San Juan or Ponce. Fast service. Current rates. Deferred service in current language at half price. For best service use the largest and fastest cable company. Office in San Juan, Royal Bank of Canada Building. Office in Ponce, in front of the Co. rreo, on the beach.
THE VIEWS OF fBANCE BEFORE BOMA, BRUSSELS AND LONDON September 9.- "Le Petit Parisién" says that M. Boumer and M. Loucheur will visit London, Boma and Brussels to make the views of the Republic clear to the governments of these capitals. THE EX-KAISEB HAS NOT LEFT HOLLAND , LONDON, September 9.- The newspapers give the news, published by the Parisian newspapers, that the ex-emperor William had left in an airplane from his residence in Doorn 1 (Holland), evading. All this has been denied by a professional office in Amsterdam. A British official of the Inter-Allied Commission and his "chaufeur" were kidnapped recently by a band of armed Germans, but have not so far been found. It is believed that these two individuals were captured by members of the patriotic commission of Upper Silesia, as hostages, to take revenge, in case the murderer of Major Montalegre was condemned to death. GENERAL PERSHING WILL RETURN TO FRANCE PARIS, September 9.- The Minister of War officially announced that General Pershing would visit the French Republic again, at the end of October, for the purpose of collecting one of the American soldiers whose identification has not been possible, to take him to America and erect a monument to him in Arlington National Cemetery. Pershing will arrive aboard the "Olympia" and will be accompanied by a conscript. Marshal Foch will attend the burial ceremony of the unknown American soldier, which will take place at the end of October, THE GREEKS OCCUPY NEW POSITIONS ATHENS, September 9.- An official communiqué assures us that the Greeks continue to advance, but without ceasing to fight. They have occupied the heights of Baskireney and the gorges of Hivri. They also continue to advance north of the village of Milifapily, 38 kilometers from Angora. Café-Restaurant 'Colonial' Plaza Baldorioty" The best and cheapest place to eat. 1
i Atlantic Fruit Company i Pier No. 7 - North River, N. Y. | Announces the Inauguration of its "Weekly Service" with the departure of the steamer "TANAMO" | SEPTEMBER 22nd from NEW YORK to PUERTO RICO Contribute to the support of this new Line by ORDERING all your shipments by the ships of the same. i VILLAR & COMPAÑIA Inc. i GENERAL AGENTS: TeL 347. P. O. Box 201. San Juan, P. R. " . Agents * R. Cortada A Cía Sucr. Híram Gómez, Mayagüez.
- tubliibed distributed under permit (Xe. ÓOÍ) "Aoriiig by the Act of October 6, 1S17, on Ha at the Port Ottee at Ran Juan. Porto Rico. By order of the Preeidwt, A. 8 Bur leeon, Postmaster General. JCntared aa second class metier, febrnary Si, 1910. at the Poet Office at Sea Juan. Porto Bi co. United States of America andar the Act of march >. 18T>
Homeland above all
■ . I The example of the Philippines-says the 'Washington Evening Star'-has strengthened the outbreak of independence in the island of Puerto Rico.
Commenting on Mr. Córdova Dávila's interview with the President, an editorial in the 'Washington Star' of August 31 last says: "The seriousness of the Puerto Rican situation comes as a surprise to us. For some years rumors had reached the Continent from time to time that certain ambitious Puerto Rican politicians wanted independence in order to better manage public affairs; but these rumors had no character of violence or threat. The independence movement in Puerto Rico may have been strengthened and developed as a consequence of analogous movements in the Philippines where ambitious politicians want to establish an independent Republic in that remote region of the world! "Whatever the reasons for its development, that movement has to ; fail. 5L GOVERNOR REILY I IN HIS INAUGURAL SPEECH EX 1 PUT THE TRUE AMERICAN SENTIMENT ON THIS MATTER AND WILL BE SUPPORTED IN HIS ATTITUDE BY THE NATIONAL ADMINISTRATION He, of course, would not have expressed himself as he did if he had not been sure of the ground on which he stood. f Puerto Bieo is better off under the stars and stripes than it could ever be under a bank of its own. Puerto Rico has prospered and is prospering under American rule, and as long as the flag of the United States flies over the Island it will share in the same fate as the Nation of which it is a part. These pro-independence agitators are therefore misguided and are pounding on cold iron by disregarding the appropriate admonitions of Governor Reily". To anyone who knows the moral and psychological structure of the American people, to anyone who is versed in the mental processes and propelling forces which determine the formation of public opinion in the United States, It is clear as daylight that those concepts in the above-mentioned editorial represent the true view of the Nation on the present state of affairs in Puerto Rico* This is not to say that there is no diversity of opinion in the United States as to the definite solution of our "status", or better said? 0 ' 1 with respect to the precise determination of the relations to be established between us and the United States.
On the contrary, given our geographical situation and the political, military and commercial interests of the United States created by that geographical situation in our Island, many are those who understand that neither they nor we can avoid the need to maintain certain kinds of political relations, and the judgment of the experts in these matters, therefore, varies. What we have wished to signify is that the editorial alluded to expresses in precise and unequivocal terms the way of seeing and thinking of the American people in general about the attitudes assumed today by our politicians in the face of the rebuffs of the new governor, Mr. Reily. - The present historical moments are, ¡ in my concept, the most serious and criti- ■ eos yet presented to our politicians in our relations with the , United States. They are not, therefore, ! ■ propitious moments for us to indulge in the 1 game of our local politics, inspired by the selfish interests of parties and individuals. No, these are not times when we should attend only to the 1 interests of this or that political faction or this or that party leader. Political parties have their mission in the development of the collective life of the peoples; they are, in truth, the exponent of their political culture and they mark the most advanced system in the different philosophical theories of government. But parties are necessary when they represent different orientations in different aspects of the co- , ¡ lective life of peoples, towards useful, profitable and practical ends which affect their prestige, their well-being and their happiness. Political parties, therefore, must first and foremost attend to the immediate and future interests of the people they represent. From this point of view, it may sometimes be necessary for a party to radically modify its policy; it may even be necessary for it to disappear. Such are the tAP 108 parties, such are the demands of the homeland. And besides, sometimes it is better policy, from the point of view of tactics, to abandon an advanced position and retreat to another more protected and "secure" position. Political parties that do not evolve in this way are either because they do not have good generals or because their leaders do not have good generals.
good generals or because their leaders are not good patriots. The greatest mistake that can be made in the field of politics, as in the battlefields between opposing forces, is to rush into the fray without means or resources, without being prepared for it. Political parties must therefore be managed like disciplined army corps. A false di-i rection, a wrong move, a hasty evolution, or a maneuver out of time can not only compromise the prestige of the party and cause its ruin, but bring the country to the edge of a precipice, to despair and disgrace. The men who lead the political parties have therefore great responsibilities towards the people. These men do not owe it to themselves, they do not have the right to let themselves be snatched away from their first impulses. When serious, dangerous or critical situations arise, these men do not have the right to act on their own, because the prestige, well-being and happiness of the country are involved. At such times, they must proceed with consultation and deliberation. These men owe themselves to the position they occupy, and under no circumstances should they depart lightly, compromising their party ¡ ' and defrauding the confidence and good faith ¡ ' of those who look to them as guides and follow them. i At such times they should proceed with consultation and deliberation, and not under the nervousness of a sleepless night. The mission of the politician, as well as that of the statesman and the diplomat, is constantly to put his own personality to the supreme interests, immediate and future, of his country. He has no right, therefore, to inject into his political acts the virus of his own passions. Utic acts the virus of his own personal passions, of his mortification, or of his disenchantment, and much less of his own interests. And if at any time he does not feel disposed to proceed in this way, his duty is well marked, and that is to withdraw entirely from politics, or at least to yield the place he occupies to other men who are in a better condition than himself and can proceed in accordance with the needs, conveniences - Interests of the country or collectivity they represent And in the present times more than at any other, men are discussed (Continued ex p. 9.)
ROUGH YARN DRIL THE COOLEST AND MOST DURABLE CLOTHING + - FOR ELEGANT AND ECONOMIC MEN - 41 S\00\ *P A 0=11 GONZALEZ PAPIN CO. I 1 O=| The Most Elegant and Cheapest Clothes you can get, . SHANTUNG RAW SILK VE * VIDfflERAS # S J
Teatro "America" Today Saturday grao night of Art -Puerto Rico premiere-"EL MARQUEZ DE ,ORO" remarkable film with a cast of six stars Also the Incomparable tonadillera madrileña "Resurrección Quijano" i-Grandes couplets new"-1 Tomorrow Sunday; "RESURRECCION QUIJANO" and the remarkable premiere in Puerto Rico "EL MILAGRO DE NEW YORK" A 30 X 40 CENTAVOS LUNETA;
Yesterday morning Mr. Arjona Siaca, Mr. Jordán and Mr. J. V. Figueroa, representatives to the House of Representatives for the Republican Party, visited the For taleza to meet with Mr. Reily and explain to him the economic situation of the workers in the districts of Yauco-Guánica, Guayanilla-Pe ñuelas and Coamo, which they represent. The aforementioned gentlemen desisted, in the end, of their purpose, due to the fact that there were a considerable number of people in the town to see the Governor, and it was already about twelve o'clock in the afternoon.
Alonso Riera & Co. has been incorporated, according to certification issued by the Secretary of Puerto Rico, dated September 2, 1921, its incorporators being the following: Jai1 me Pizá, B. Alonso, M. Riera PaL mer, and Leopoldo Santiago Car. i ; mona. Said corporation has its offices at caHe "Comercio"! - Nos. 29 and 31, San Juan, Maya, Güez, Ponce and New York.
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1921.
NUMBER 790. - ii -
The director of the organ of the Administration supports the Governor.
The Secretary to the Governor gave yesterday to one of our Editors the following letter addressed to Mr. Reily . The letter is from Geo. B. Lockwood, : i editor of the "National Republican," of Washington, which is the organ of the administration : "Washington, D. C- 1 August 31, 1921. Hon. E. Mont Reily, Executive Mansion, San' Juan, P. R. Dear Governor: I enclose a clipping from the editorial page of the "National Republican," 1 which refers to your attitude on the independence question. I congratulate you on the vigorous means you have used to raise and maintain that policy. We have had many vacillations on island matters, resulting always in misinterpretations and ultimately in serious complications. Sincerely yours, George B. LOCKWOOD, Editor of the "National Republican." ' IMPORTANT INTERVIEW IN FORTALEZA Yesterday they were holding a long conference with the Governor ; Messrs. Tous Soto, Feliu and Gonzalez Mena, which lasted more than two hours. We do not know the object and details of the said interview, which is the first official conference held by the Republican leaders with the Governor; but we learned later that the principal object of it was to visit Mr. Tous Soto with the Governor, which he had not been able to do since the day the Governor delivered his inaugural address. i At the Secretary's table the former gentlemen signed a memorandum, which we supposed was to be given to the Governor. From a part of it which was read by one of our editors, it appears that the said document refers to the appointments. The repu- 1 blicancs seem to allege before the Governor the right that they have to have public employees appointed in those towns that they won. Although we do not know the certainty of this, it is to be supposed that they are also claiming the right that they have as members of the legislative branch to have one of the department heads belonging to the Republican party appointed to them. We asked Mr. Feliu about this and he denied that they had such pretensions, stating that such an appointment was detrimental to the Republican party because otherwise the responsibility of the government would be exclusively that of the Unionist party. I DON'T SUPPOSE SO MUCH VERSATILITY IN THE POLITICIANS, SAYS THE SB. PAULA ACUNA Yesterday, accidentally, we met Se plisa y forran botones. A CARAZO, Brau St 72.
in Tetuán street with Mr. de Paula Acuña. The illustrious veteran stated, among other things, in the presence of a reporter of ours and Mr. Dalman Canet, of "La Democracia", that the Vice-President of the Union, Mr. Torres, would give timely explanations of his action before the Central Board, since such an action required further explanations. Mr. Paula Acuña expressed himself in the sense that the attitude of Mr. Torres seemed to be a consequence of the manifestations of Mr. Coll Cuchí, who in a recent edition of EL MUNDO, said that "he absolved Mr. Belly of all guilt, understanding that his attitude was due to extraneous The Sr. Acuña also stated that all these acts were aimed at initiating a policy of attraction between the Party and the Governor; but that they would have to be ventilated before the Central Board, since he did not suppose that there was so much versatility in the politicians. DON JOSE G. TORRES AND THE PUBLL . CACION DE LOS TELEGRAMAS We informed Mr. Torres of the 1* impre" sion caused by the publication of the telegrams. He told us: "I do not know why such an impression as you say, because I understand that no one should give those telegrams an interpretation that they do not have. Those cablegrams had been published because the Governor so requested it from Mr. Torres, to whom he said that their publication was coa venient, because in spite of the good relations between them, he-the Governor-was still being attacked in the press. Mr.'. Torres agreed, and the cablegrams were published.... I In my telegram to Cordova-he said to Mr. Torres-no mention is made of the Governor's policy. Simply M says < that we should endorse his attitude, that is, the friendly attitude of him toward me and toward the Union, which may be Considered as the suspension of hostile!(Continued on ná*. We are now selling SOMBREROS DEi ; PAJA YOUNG BROTHERS | A $2.50 De Paja "KNOr > $4 SO SWIGGETT BROTHERS Su Juan. I
i| SENSATIONAL! THE NEW TYPE OF "MILLER RUBBER" SIZE 30 x 3-112 (OVER-SIZE) FOR FORD IS NOW AVAILABLE. WE GUARANTEE YOUR SUCCESS. I ABOY, VIDAL A CO-, INC. SAN JUAN, P. R. | LIVESTOCK OCCASION I have 20 Cows and 2 "HOLSTEIN" Bulls left. Due to having to ship to New Orleans next week I am selling these animals at very limited prices so I recommend you to take advantage of this opportunity. MARTIN SCHIRO or ISIDORO D. DELGADO. DELGADO. Miramar, Parada 10, in front of the garage of "La Colectiva** j Camino de Miraflores.