®OW®NDO
8 flats 3 ctve. vWnWuvi One year,>7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR ¡II |
[SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
H butlUeS SÍad distributed rajar poniút (Me. tal) mmítiMii by tta> Act of oetobar 6, ISlt, on tía at táa' Post O/flca oí Bm Jnaa. Porto Bíoo. By order of tbo President, *. A. B*rleion, Poetmaetar General. Bnterod as second elaso matter. H P fobyaary S1.1S1S. at tbs Poet Office at flan duaq. Jte" ro Pn "t "l Btetee of Amortes andar the Aet cf mareh ", 1878 ;
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 1921.
NUMBER 624.
Important session held yesterday in the Senate.
▲ 1M fita te te, tarta ra declared abi "r te te acaten under te pratidzncte del tetar Barata. " racretario paaó Mata, ta dte porapwhada ate aar Jtida el setal do te oaaldn anterior. So da loc_ tete a tea petitions and projects pre MBtedoo. ta dolara a> Senate in total coiteates and me put to discussion the Beaotaeten concurrent do nétnara No. S Müctteado te reelection of go. appraiser Yager. A lathe in prd of the Beaotaolta was consumed by Mr. Cuerna Xofntira, of the majority and Dr. Barbean of the minority, who gave several interpellations. Twípaéihia was ***** biso * aacnlr to the gallant speaker in the course I of cu dlaeuno brfllantísimo, of a -tilda argumentation' Saco one do te word the senator for Ponce the Lleta. Rafael Martines Modal. He studied the political situation of the president-elect Mr. Harding, in the face of the request that is made dono, to undermine a candidate of the political parties that the president has, for a fistful of trust and responsibility. He spoke of respect for the majority. He said that coa resolution entrafiaba a huge political question by ! porte of the Unionist party He analyzed the two policies followed by I both parties and explained the situation I ■ do loa who feel as he does the Ideal of Botado and ti do Independence. He shared Washington's case by rejecting the third resolution as an act of moral greatness, as described by ol Ilodo. Santón! in the (temara, and said quo Yager accepting that cera reelection I will have done "ELRAYqj 'all . -. saetee, te" WMUMrtra in all.
ColowRealizatioii Truth. and six cents IN THE - ALLEN 62, OF LUIfiA Cofltináa lasflBKe burning at prices never seen. Precious percales 20 ctvs. yds. to 6 ctvs. .OUa mechifico 20 " " " 6 * Domestic good 15 ** " " 5 X, Id <20 : Cactanir for Fal^^H, 35 " " " " 12 ' Cnuh'ioperior 40 " 3*'" 12 ' Pangos magnificent 35 " " " " 12 í ' ¿ 40 " " " " 15 ; Oten titira 40 " " " " " 12 ÍPoplfa pi M 45 " " " " 12% J. ftfiro 30 " " " " 10 r ' íd titito ; 40 " " ".*< 15 LÁlaMÜMdto of 1.50 " " " 95 A L/VoUm tolerates - 40 and 50 " " 18 60 " " " " 25 * ' 30 " " " m io ■í T inA -BsM - "0 " " " " 25 " " ■ 75 " " " " 25 " " 25 " 0° "1 " ° "0 - "V -* 1,1 "O' 1 * 1 * 1 * Lí- I ■ ■ J
t B fe* Dominican ■" wc'T ■ cjr TD" fe UiSJ-/ oUJK fc. l^ 1 111 ' rrv .. . . s _ fteg DqicwniBb* Curaçao and Port" of Mtaest" mea, admithmdo freight" ; puwwp.... . . ■ r
mar a ti, recalling LicdO' Santana: "¡Cútete pequafies moralí" He censured the governor's performances*. He said that he had not even learned Spanish in the 8 years he had lived in the country. He said that he had not solved any problem by his own initiatives, and called for the defeat of the Boooluclón B1 Llcdo. Toas Soto took the floor. He said that in that resolution, he wanted to shuffle the name of the patriot Mufioz Rivera with that of the aven í turar ■ Mr. Yager who came from Kentucky, the land of bluegrass and big mules, to govern this country without knowing its customs and history. He referred to the speeches made by Mr. Barcelo, fighting the actions of the governor which were now to be put "by the horns of the moon.*' The resolution, he said, was a political resolution, but of a political ' mosquine and absurd kind. He said that it was the child of the strength at the disposal of the majority; that he was glad, as a politician, that the resolution was passed, in "vidence of the poor ability of the Mayhteldo, i ría, and that it made him portorri. ! that he was ridiculed. I The -he said,- cohibit the president OPERATION by the remarkable Leandro Lopez de la Ro the person *of Don Santiago de Carolina, to whom a hernia with anesthesia lo_ patient is today, in a state yfoRtamente satisfactory. of pine for ve1..'" 50 and 60 feet long and 12" Bl5" thick ships! Finished reNHr offers at price" limited. r V JUAN ESTRADA | Fajardo Beach, P. R.
A new suspected case was admitted yesterday afternoon to the Cuarentenario Hospital.
TWO INFECTED RATS WERE CATCHED YESTERDAY - 10 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN ADMITTED TO THAT HOSPITAL SO FAR.
OTEA OFFICE: The chief inspector, Mr. Bafael Per náncez, has set up a new temporary office in the southern part of the theater -The removal of garbage from San Juan, which was under the direction of the inspector general, Mr. Fer nández, is now finished. Now all the personnel of the aforementioned service is working in Santurte under the direction of Mr. Fernán le: and Mr. Escudero, who are not resting for a moment. In Santnrce there are at present working fourteen mule carts and thirteen trucks. The garbage has been taken to the farm of Don Wenceslao Borda, where it is burned* The attention of the electricity and telephone companies has been drawn to the fact that they are serving as rat-proof posts, through which the rats climb and then enter the houses, after having made some balancing games on the wires. It is expected that the posts and all coconut palms will be provided with the corresponding zinc ring to prevent the rodents from climbing. Yesterday Mr. Travieso, Mr. Diaz, Mayor and Municipal Health Commissioner of San Juan, respectively, made a general visit to S. Juan, Pta. de Tierra and Santurce. h Yesterday we were informed that the steamer "Edtth", which arrived from New* York, had brought all the medicines requested to the Worte to combat the plague, except the vaccine. Today at one o'clock in the afternoon the latter will arrive and will be immediately applied. íXTK PIG WITH PESTE? Yesterday on our 'tour through Santur ce we met a jíbaro who was bringing two pigs, one of which refused to
One of the pigs refused to feed and protested, shrieking, when the driver measured its ribs with a foete. -The Health Department, through its chief inspectors, Scfkres Fernandez and Escuda ro, has taken steps to force the owners of the lots to clean them up. Some have been notified directly, and have been given 24 hours to comply with the law. |REFUSAL: We have reports that some buses and electric cars are refusing to bring into the city the people who are to take the rats to be examined at the Labor it crio. This, in addition to .rear A r¡hev<^ obstacle for the buo I FELIX ms BERNIER I i He has been ill in Porc: for several days now, our esteemed friend and colleague Don Félix Matos Bernier, illustrious journalist and noeta who has always ennobled with his vibrant and sera" pen the pages of this newspaperWe sincerely hope for the speedy recovery of the distinguished intellectual who is one of the most valuable collaborators of EL MUNDO.
The campaign is a completely superfine measure on the part of the buses and trolleys, since it is known that the rodents, in order to be taken to the laboratory, are put in cans with a sufficient quantity of disinfectant, which prevents any kind of contamination. 1 THE SALT BARRIOS IF YOU CAN AND THE COLD HOYO: What EL MUNDO said in yesterday's edition, and which has apparently been misread by a distinguished colleague of ours, was that the opinion of several doctors was that these neighborhoods should be burned because of their unhygienic state. In this information we do not state that this was a measure adopted by any official center THE PHARMACIES OF BLANCO AND JULIA: i The pharmacies of Blanco and Juliá, - which had been closed, with the object of being disinfected and fumigated, have yesterday morning reopened their doors to the public because they have already been duly fumigated and disinfected: i We are informed that the steamer "Count Wifredo" which was to arrive on this island i coming from Spain will call at the port of Ponce and not at the port of this (Continued on page 3.) COLOSSAL PROGRAM AT THE "RIALTO" TOMORROW
THEATER "AMERICA" TODAY1 TODAY Reappearance of RaWr&íMonte * Y ANGELICA GHJTIERREZ / Bailes Guarachas - Rumbas ~ | EL RAYO INVISEBLE Ep. 12 and 13 2fi CTS -BUTACA ' Mafiaña:-Matinal conJa roche.-Matíráe film with "THE GREAT SE CHETO'' and gifts to children-By the Night new numbers by RAUL DEL MÓNTE "
The Bruno y Gonzalez Company has chosen for tomorrow, Sunday, a regal prograin, which consists of the e*titto . in Puerto Rico of a beautiful drama in six acts, in which the beautiful and naive Carmel Myers is the protagonist and which is entitled "The Golden Dream". I The company instructs us to communicate to the public that this film is magnificent and recommend it unreservedly to its many patrons. There will be a gift for the most fortunate in the morning batch and the current prices will apply.
OPPORTUNITY!!! I am* opening a new plot of land between Camino de Loiza and Calle ETVÍc Leary* for excellent plots for residential homes. Two great lots on Camino de Loiza. Twelve smaller ones to the North of Camino de Loiza. l¿S==-'. V.XTÍ.T.8B* m* II 1 I -mí'V'.T-ja.-T - i Hénry W. Dooley Sues, of L. Villamil & Có. King's Court, Santurce. Marina. - H í ■
EIELAUUKJ. RIVEKZ ALLEN 58, P. O. Bol 1387, TELEFON#. Today Saturday 26, "mpi "ÉB¿fa great ; Brand "ARROW", pira tMru, cak niñoe ; at prices mís ba>oe than before ; In addition we have tefinicted da article", ! d, Mda and cotton, ""ntórtM. and ti fe and, mu- : 5 Walter "T RT vRI&a -i P "1 Hz.
Auction; Today SaturdayCu 2 o'clock in the afternoon- < of in you Uncle, 12 to < Cross Street, vtedereiftos to the best by < tor and By sweeping the following * lotee? ' 450 t pairs shoes for men- < 1 5 dozen underwear for children. 46 fine trojes for ladies. ' 1 tote women's hats. 1 showcase for Cigar Store. ' 1 display case for exhibitions. . f nKHfeiu 1 aperator and a motitader. ' Fine blutua, skirts of all . \ Mddtef for cumas, t fufinHeí < : /I-r . - _ ■ _ - _ _ . ". .¿.-'-i -i -ta.-x'
From talk with Republican Senator Mr. Martinez Nadal.
Under the silver of the moon, the distinguished representative in the Senate for the Ponce District, Mr. Martínez Nadal, was strolling the other night in Baldorioty Square, feeling the caresses of midnight, which he said he had not enjoyed for a long time. Even though we did not have the honor of knowing the eminent legislator personally, in our capacity as representatives of EL MUNDO, we approached him with the purpose of making known the intentions that he carries to the high legislative body to which he has been deservedly elevated by the will of his electors - "That is a short story" - began Mr. Martinez Nadal. - I do not know what the caucus of my party may have agreed on this matter, but as far as I am concerned, and it seems to me that this is the policy that the circumstances advise, I do not intend to present any bill. It is almost certain that my other minority caucus members will do the same ... What for? The parliamentary experience* that we have acquired tells us so. When we introduce a good bill, which is in the favor of the majority, it is amended in the appropriate committee and then reported favorably, and it is passed as if it had come out of committee: We will impart our approval to all those pro NORMA TALMADGE The many admirers (ladies so_ ¡ ¡'< above all) with which this excellent. i sa actress counts, have today the opportunity to see her in the accredited and spacious hall of the CINE LUNA, in its grandiose Pathé pío ducción "WOMAN WITHOUT NAME* V (Premiere in Puerto Rice). This is a film that was going to be released at extraordinary prices but is presented at current prices.
DO YOU SUFFER FROM TAPEWORM OR - TAPEWORM? Well, in less than an hour, without the need for purgatives or any diet, it will be removed (head and all) by the famed specialist Dr. Raldiris. 22 "Carretera St,. Cataño. Read the lag 3 letters on the 6th page.
The majority's bills that benefit the country and in particular those that refer to public instruction. As to those bills of a political character which affect our interests as a party, they will be energetically opposed by us, even when we know that they are to become laws by the powerful and overwhelming force of the majority. -Culi is your opinion in regard to House Concurrent Resolution i No. 2, on the re-election of Mr. YaI ger? Are you familiar with it? -Yes, I know it. My opinion is that this is the result of a political plan of the majority party, in their anxiety to justify themselves to the national powers who had completely lost confidence in them by their campaigns for Independence, trying to win the votes of the multitudes in the elections of last November. If the majority should force the machine," said the Senator for Ponce, "and bring the aforementioned Resolution to violent discussion, I will stand up to fight it, because I consider that the actions of Governor Yager have been neither fair* nor just. There are public officials, my friend," continued Mr. Martinez Nadal, "against whom the charges we have are of such a nature, that they would be immediately dismissed if there were another governor at La Fortaleza than Yager -tjz -And about the actions of the two minorities, don't you think they could (Continued on p. 3)
COLMADO FONT , Aver, J3®rja afternoon, has remained cirractó this accredited COLMADO in order to precede its fumigation. This fumigation was done spontaneously by us, / we do so for the knowledge of our large clientele, being open again from today. Sues, by F. Font and Advt. Br. Advt. A CARAZO, Brau St. 72. Advt.
French Steamer "MARTINIQUE" Expected at this port from 2 to 5 of the incoming and* will be dispatched for HAVRE and' BORDEAUX. cargo and* passage for the above ports. For further information contact Messrs. BEHN BROTHERS INC.
TRUE MANUFACTURING OF SHOES AND CLOTHING MADE FOR GENTLEMEN IN "THE COUNTRY TOWN" cross to. , san 4Uan. r. r.
THE SENSATION OF THE YEAR! ■■KIWMMS By DOROTHY PHILLIPS Extraordinary Prices H 01
BLUSHES We need some agents of recognized competence for 1< making fine blouses. Contact Max Grab Fashion Co. Box 969 z , Tetuan 38 San Jnan, P. R,