ELMQNDO
TI I UIT'ITV ■ TTT P'I' 114 11'1 .10 pages 3 ctvs, Semester, $4.00 One afy,$7.50.
" < - Offices: ;; Salvador Brau. 3T * Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345 ";
MORNING DAILY.
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Pnblitead "nd distributed andar panait (Bo. dOl) anuKted Dj m. Set ai oeu>o" - 1"1T. on Sla M Um Foat UtSte ai 8*n ' he PwsMte* A ABuiaaon. Postmaster Ganaral Bntarsd as saaond elssa matter fabmary 81. 1018, at tha Post Ottes at San Jun. PodB B1 oo. United States ot Amariea andar the AM at march >.
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 10, 1921.
NUMBER 868.
YEAR III.
THE LICDO. MARTIN TRAVIESO SUPPORTS THE STATEMENTS MADE BY BARCELO.
he believes that a change in the party's program is necessary.
In his office, at the City Hall, we visited yesterday Ledo. Martin Travieso, prominent leader of the majority party. The object of our visit was to ask Mr. Travieso, chairman of the Mediation and Conciliation Commission, about the outcome of the meeting held by the commission last Thursday afternoon. -We have not-he told us-reached a definitive agreement on the issue raised by the tobacco growers of "La Colectiva". We are still studying the question, which, as you know, has been complicated by the Company's refusal to submit to the Arbitration Committee, alleging that there is no state of strike in its factories and that the tobacco growers have submitted to the conditions imposed. The tobacco workers, for their part, accept that they have been forced to accept the above conditions; but forced by the present pressing situation, in which a strike is completely impossible. At Thursday's meeting, therefore, we confined ourselves to an exchange of impressions and are studying ways of seeking a solution favorable to all interests. -What is your opinion, Mr. Travieso, about the current political situation? -I think things are getting better. -How so?
-The statements made by Barcrtó, which are reproduced in today's issue, show it clearly. He has said that we are ame rlr.anna, that we want to be, and that we wish to preserve the ties that bind us to the American people. I would subscribe to a program along those lines, because it seems to me that that is how we would interpret I the way the majority of our people think and feel. Because that is the way I think, I fully support this political statement by the head of the party. His statements are clear and categorical; they could not be doubted, since they have been made to a Spanish newspaper, and they could not have been misinterpreted or misinterpreted. Moreover, their tone shows that they were made by the chief, besides the fact that' in my presence, these statements were made by Mr. Barce'ó to President Harding, at his residence in Marion, Ohio, Córdova Dávila having served as interpreter. I applaud - continued Mr. Travieso - that attitude of Mr. Barce'ó, because that is how I think and because I understand that this is the only policy that suits the country and the party: if the party wants to be reborn more vigorous than ever and take over completely and forever the whole country. Ahnra well, I believe that the statements made by (Continued on page 7)
SENSATIONAL is the enormous reduction we have made in our prices for automobile tires and tubes. Ask for the new prices to be surprised THE FI8K TIBE STOBE ADRIAN NELSON Distributor. San Juan, P. B. Advt.
Big Event! "The Luck of a Viennese Ballerina" Extraordinary film by LYA MARA which has caused such a huge sensation in our pub- - blioo. soon to be released! Advt.
Gentlemen Owners of FORD Gotnas Royal Cord 30 x 3 1¡2 . The U. S- Tire Co. did not want to bring to market a Royal Cord 30 x 3 1|2 Clincher rubber, for Ford and other cars, because to date Cord rubbers in that size and flange type were not giving satisfactory results. After many tests, the U. S. now brings to the market the ROYAL CORD rubber in size 30 x .3 1|2 Clincher. This famous rubber can be obtained in our different warehouses in the Island and this capital, or directly from our establishment PIRETRANTONI & SOJO "La Tienda de Goma". San Juan, P. R.
To the Quebradillas excursionists The excursionists will be served to be in their respective stations at 6 A. M. The departure of the train will be exact. There will be stops in Miramar, Talleres, Parada 20, Martín-Peña, Bayamón and Toa-Baja. The Grand Knight will be at the Council from 4:30 to 5:30, this afternoon THE COMMISSION. i. Buttons are plied and lined. A. CARAZO, Bran St 72.
"Cié. Gle. Transatlantique NOTICE TO SHIPPERS The steamer "CARAVELLE" from Havre and Bordeaux is expected from the 14th to the 15th of the present month. This ship will depart from this port for Puerto Plata, Ports of the North of Haiti and Santiago de Cuba. It will admit passage for the above mentioned ports. Send your requests for coffee shipments to Santiago de Cuba, as soon as possible. Behn Brothers. Inc. agts. Tetuan, corner of Tancfa. San Juan, Puerto Rico. *H I 1 It 1 1 1 1 < 11. ■!■♦♦♦♦♦♦♦■>♦♦< 1 114 THE FASHION ESTABLISHMENT "EL RUBI" Wishing to favor our numerous clientele, we offer from today a great reduction in the prices of FUENTE DE SODA All Mantecados or Ice Cream at 1O cents All Soft Drinks with Soda at 5 CPntavna We also offer our large assortment of Bonbons and < Chocolate from the best manufacturers in the United States at ¡ limited prices. " ■ We have many other items of our own for gifts that we have just received. 32 SALVADOR BRAU STREET. ♦"♦""♦♦♦♦ <♦♦♦♦♦♦♦ <■"♦""<♦♦■" ! "♦♦♦♦♦♦♦""♦♦♦♦♦" i
JAPAN ACCEPTS THE PROPOSAL CONCERNING THE FORMATION OF A QUADRUPLE ALLIANCE.
(By French Cable) WASHINGTON, December 9.-The Japanese government has definitely accepted the plan to form a quadruple alliance, provided its authority in the Pacific is recognized. A BROTHER OF HERRERA ASKS FOR THE SAVING OF THE FORMER PRESIDENT PARIS, December 9.- Qp-j Julio Herrera, brother of the fallen president of Guatemala, has met with the Guatemalan ambassador in France, in order that he may intervene on behalf of his brother, who has been taken prisoner by the revolutionaries. ! Don Julio Herrera later visited the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that the latter, through the mediation of the French representative in Guatemala,* would do everything in its power to save the fallen president. DUBLIN, December 9.- All the Irish political prisoners who have been released by King George's decree are very happy to have been honourably released after having served their country. All have declared that Ireland must consider itself satisfied with such a favorable settlement. ESTRADA CABBERA HAS BEEN RELEASED WASHINGTON, December 9.- Dispatches received in this capital from Mexico announce that the former President of Guatemala, Estrada Cabrera, has been released by the provisional government. The new government has invited all the people who had been exiled by the Herrera government to return to Guatemala.
r, december 9.
the Ccrte ÍE encuno THE LEGISLATURE OF THE PHILIPPINES "SJ ÍE mrF E CONTEST THE REPORT OF PTC RICO DENT THE WOOD-FORBES DELEGATION
The Boston Circuit Court of Appeals has just decided three identical cases, which are considered to be of great importance, since the decision reached by that Court will affect numerous property titles in Puerto Rico. In these cases, the Supreme Court had opined some time ago that the property of minors could be sold by their guardians, as long as such sales were authorized by any court of law, although the Civil Code stated, however, that only the District Court where the minor resided or the property was located could do so. Two of the cases had already been discussed a year ago, but the Court of Appeals had not decided anything on these matters until the third case was presented for discussion during the month of October. When it had studied the case, the Court of Appeals now decided the opposite of what the Supreme Court had said on the same subject, that is, that all sales of property of minors, not authorized by the District Court, according to the Civil Code, were null and void and would have no effect, and that the purchaser of such property would be obliged to return said property to the minor, as well as the amount of the rents and profits. The first case heard on an issue similar to these was that of Lopez v. Central Vanina. The three cases in which the Boston Court of Appeals* has reached a decision are as follows: Martorell (Continued on p. 6). j = r brought before the public opinion, whose verdict we proclaim in advance to abide by. Are you willing? With your permission, until next week. Femando P. LEDESMA. San Juan, December 9, 1921
VIA "ALL AMERICA CABLES" MANILA, December 9.-The Philippine Legislature, dissatisfied with most of the points contained in the report submitted to Congress by Wood and Forbes, has agreed to appoint a committee to reply in due form to the said political document. The legislators have also agreed to launch a manifesto to the country, containing the response to be given to said report, after said document is known by the government in Washington. The members of the Committee will then embark for the United States in order to meet with President Harding and ask that independence be granted to the Philippines. ASUNCION, December 9.-The German officer who during the war sank the steamer "Lusitania" was killed today while on a Paraguayan warship. Dr. Frias I offer vials of Neo-Sal-varsan, legitimate German, at twenty dollars, the six vials constituting the series. TAKE ADVANTAGE. Office: Telephone Building. Tanca corner of Tetuan. From 11 a.m. to 12 a.m. and 3 to 5 p.m. San Suan, P. R. Alonso Riera &co., Warehousemen, importers and exporters of Tobacco in Rama of all kinds and origins. OFFERS: Burlap (raw) for packing tobacco. Empty barrels for tobacco. Samson presses for tobacco packing. Empty sacks for sugar (next harvest). Prices on request. Warehouses and offices. "Tobacco Palace. San Juan. P. R. New York: 47 Washington St., San Juan.
THE CREWMEN OF THE STEAMER "LUSITANIA" EXACT TERRIBLE REVENGE.
The crewmen of the steamship "Lusitania" are exacting a terrible revenge for having ordered the sinking of the steamship. NEW YORK, December 9.-The terrible bandit Adolfo Piquelme, who, after committing innumerable misdeeds, was recently captured by the authorities and imprisoned in Littlerock Prison, managed to cunningly escape from the cell where he was confined. After regaining his freedom, he opened the prison door and invited all the prisoners to escape. The guards were warned of this maneuver and tried to prevent the escape of the prisoners, but six of them managed, after a hard fight, to lock the prison guards in a cell, and the prisoners escaped immediately in an automobile. Theater "America" -Sunday, December 11.-* "EL CHICUELO" (The Kid.) I with Charles Chaplin. Special showings for the children: at 10:30 A. M. and at 4:15 P. M. Send your children. VULCANIZING PLANT We sell one, of the scrMita Ja brand Akron-WiUiams, which is the best made in this class of apparatus. It is still in its boxes, as received from the United States. ABOY, VIDAL AND CO., INO. Miller" Building, San Juan, P. R. QUINCALLEROS We have just received from the United States an enormous assortment in lace and stitch fabrics which we want to make AT COST We dispatch packages by C. O. D. Sucesión de Roque Gonzalez.
&CA. In front of "LA LINDA", Cruz 10. Apartado No. 466. Advt,
I ASCENCION RIVERA Vda. de ORTIZ I HAS DIED Her bereaved" children Carmen, Lucia, Maria Ortiz da Barreras, Jose; children-in-law Herminia Ramirez de Ortiz, au* 5'; W sente, Rafael Barreras, her grandchildren and other mourners, beg H .' you to attend the funeral, which will take place today at 4; 00 P. M. in the cemetery of San turca, departing da da H house number 24 of the street of "Barcelona", da Santurce, for ■ whose favor will be eternally grateful to you the deudos da ■ the deceased. No obituaries are distributed.
> "Armstrong Cord" RUBBERS LOWER OE PRICE j We participate to our J customers that the new, considerably reduced P price list of Armstrong Cord f rubbers Ramon Rodriguez Umpiorte 90 Allen Si. Sffiduii.
New Clothes and New Price STYLES ADVANCE FOR THE SUMMER OF 1922 Fine Gentlemen's Suits Manufactured by the House of "Kirschbaum" $25. $35. and $40. WITH GONZALEZ PADIN CO. CHALECOS. SAN JUAN. PONCE. MAYAGÜEZ.
New Orleans & Havana S. S. Company Steamship "LACKAWANNA" will leave the Port of New Orleans via Havana on the 15th of the present with cargo for the Ports of San Juan and the Island, admitting on her return cargo for the Ports of Havana and New Orleans. For further information request from ISIDORO D. DELGADO General Agent. Theater "America" PRESENTS TODAY In Matinee and Evening "Without Intervention of the Clergy" OF SELECTION T' Prices: Afternoon 25 and 15. Evening 35 and 20.
BEFORE
THE NEW REPRESENTATIVE OF 'BOSENSTADT AND WALLER. INC.' Has been appointed representative in Puerto Rico of the reputable house "Rosenstadt and Waller, Inc." of New York, which has established offices in Caguas, the active businessman Don Abelardo Alvarez, replacing Don Antonio C. Rodriguez.
"Marshall Neilan" presents its own production and story with sentimental scenes based on a touching drama entitled Vendedor de Periódicos ("DcnAp") performed by the same artists of "Vaya y consígala" and directed by the same director English and Spanish titles.
| We are pleased to announce to the public and mainly to our distinguished clientele, that we have moved our business I to house No. 75 of Salvalor Brau Street, in front of the square of the same name. In our new premises, we are in better conditions to give greater facilities to the public and where we have opened a detail of our bulb "ALPHA", generally known. RIVERO CHAVES <& CO. Cine "Luna" Today the most colossal comedy to be found in Puerto Rico, entitled. CHICUELO" ("The Kld") with Charles Chaplin and Jack Coogan. The most indifferent laugh, seeing Charles Chaplin and Jack Coogan in "CHICUELO". r
Mater Dolorosa
In today's "El Imparcial" and under the same epigraph with which we headed yesterday's article and this one, the Banco Comercial de Puerto Bico appears for the first time, after seven months of complete silence, proclaiming "urbit et orbet" that neither shareholders nor creditors are as willing as they are to give way to the reorganization of Central Bayaney. Righteous Lord, you who are in heaven and see everything, isn't this the last straw? When are you going to stop the punishment that we, the shareholders and unsecured creditors deserve, who have been going against the good wishes of the Commercial Bank, which, out of humanity, is going to throw us into the street? Come on man, let's be serious and let's stop this X little song with which he has been trying to lull us since "illo tempore". Before the public and in a very clear way we have exposed the real performance of the Bank, and that is why now he sings us the "Gori Gori" in eleven episodes that we promise to examine carefully to check his inaccuracies. We are pleased, extremely pleased, to learn that the one who is most interested in the development of Central Bayaney, and who always asks the Board for its assistance in favor of the reorganization, is the gentleman Sefirrde la Haba, something we were unaware of and which we would like to verify as a matter of conscience. We are intensely gratified by the honor of the sudden rejoinder and we unveil ourselves before the adversary, whom we invite to the process to be