elmBndo
Ij 2 pages 3 ctvs. ♦ Semester, $4.00 One year, $7.50 i
r-r-r-.fr Office": | Salvador Brau, ST t Tai. 833 P. O. Box 345 ■ ...........
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Publiaboó and diatributod andar panoli (Ha. 801) aathoriaad Bj U>" Ao* ai oetobar O, 181T, an 11, at Ua Poet Office of flan Juan. Porto Bice. By order of the Proeident. L 8. Bor loaon. Poetmaater Sonorol. Bntered aa aeoond olaaa utter, february 31, 1918, at the Poet Office at San BI eo. United Btatea of AaierJee ander th. Act of march S, 18T8
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 17, 1921.
YEAR III.
NUMBER 874.
Interesting polices statements of Ledo. Fernandez Vanga
The Ledo. E. Feimández Yanga, who even though he does not hold any position of political representation, his pen has been placed by him on all occasions at the service of the cause of his party and the country, and who by his intimate relations with the most connoted leaders of Uhionism, has more than sufficient motives to be well aware of the true political situation of the party, in a conversation he had with some friends expressed himself in tones revealing a great optimism, product of a firm and abso lute conviction that the party's lawsuit had reached a favorable solution. When the illustrious writer was asked by one of his friends about the true situation in which things had been left after the negotiations carried out in Washington and the understanding that was said to have been reached, Mr. Fernandez Vanga answered: the situation is good, better than expected. -And what -they asked- will the Governor return? -The question of the Governor is of no importance to me. He was already a fallen man, before leaving Puerto Rico, and if the commission has not achieved anything other than his dismissal, it has done very little, for nothing easier than to achieve that. My concern is the other thing: the question of principles. We have as yet no concrete news rte what has been agreed upon by the party directors who are in Washington, but I can assure you that the news is very encouraging." Our informant was very satisfied with the statements of Mr. Fernandez Vanga, which, although laconic, let us understand, according to him, the triumph that the Puerto Rican Union has achieved in its aspirations. the last meeting of the "republican committee" has given an extraordinary public response.
TODAY, Saturday, the 17th of the present, we will have in our showcase in San Justo Street an exhibition of fine jewelry worth approximately $ 50,000. J. P. BOURET INC.
BEHN BROTHERS -Inc. (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) - BANQUEROSI Berwind White Coal Mining Co. Lancashire Insurance Co. Compagnie Generale Transatlantique. Windward Islands Line-Pacific Argentine * Brazil Line La Veloce. CONDADO - Sale of plots of land. Esquina Tetuán-Tanca. SAN JUAN, P. R.
KODAK EFFECTS OF ALL KINDS For photographers and amateurs CRUZ 17 A. COLL ANNEX TO R. SÁNTAELLA
importance to the last meeting held by various elements of the "Republican Territorial Committee". It seems that at the meeting, according to the people, they discussed, among other things, the possible resignation of Mr. Toro, as well as exchanged impressions about certain cables lately received by the Republican leaders. According to our reports, Mr. Todd Jr. received a cable from the North, which appears to have related to Governor Reily, for Mr. Todd later visited Secretary Hull, to whom he showed the message, exchanging slight impressions about the text of the message. Although we do not know the text, it is assured that Secretary Hull received yesterday another very important cablegram, the clarification of which he asked for lúe go, as it seemed to him rather delicate. MR GEIGEL. Mr. Géigel, of the Republican Committee, at our questions in formed us yesterday that, indeed, they had met lately, but that they had not discussed anything about the resignation of Mr. Toro Labirthe, nor about telegrams received by them in these days. Mr. Géigel spoke of Mr. Toro's silence upon his arrival in San Juan. He expressed that he was not surprised by the attitude of his co-religionist, when he remained impenetrable before the "offensive" of the "reporters", since he (Géigel) knew that his friend was very disciplined in politics and would not be willing to issue any opinion, as long as he did not confer with the president of the Party, Mr. Tous Soto. MANUEL ANGEL RODRIGUEZ From the United States where he spent a long period of time, our esteemed friend Mr. Angel Rodriguez, head of the reputable and well-known house "Infanzon y Rodriguez", manufacturers of the excellent cigars of "La Habanera", has returned to Mayaguez. Mr. Rodriguez is a distinguished gentleman who enjoys numerous sympathies in the city of the West. Receive our affectionate greetings of welcome. # QUINCALLEROS We have just received from the United States an enormous assortment in quincalla, lace and knitwear, which we wish to carry out AT COST We dispatch packages by C. O. D. Sucesión de Roque Gonzalez & CA. In front of "LA LINDA", Cruz 10. P.O. Box No. 456. Advt.
Fierce fight predicted in U.S. Congress.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) WASHINGTON, Dec. 16.- united their efforts to have the Par In official circles in this city news is beginning to circulate that the provisions on the ratification of the Quadruple Alliance will be preceded by a noisy parliamentary fight, similar to that which originated when the matter relating to the League of Na- ¡ tions was brought before Congress. Notwithstanding the opinions against North America becoming part of the Quadruple Alliance, it is assured that the ratification of the Treaty is indisputable and that it will find a favorable atmosphere in Congress. GENERAL CAVALCANTI HAS BEEN RELEASED FROM HIS POSITION MADRID, December 16.- The Government announces that it has just relieved General Cavalcanti from his post as Commander General of the Melilla Zone, on account of certain public statements attributed to him and which are considered incompatible with the high military post held by the General. It is also reported that Cavalcanti has been called to Madrid and that General Sanjurjo, whose record of service is most brilliant, will take his place. The newspaper "El Sol" reports that -on the occasion of this change- new military events are approaching in the area of Morocco and especially in the region where the scattered Kabylons of Ab-el-Krim are located. AN AGREEMENT ON THE PACIFIC. NEW YORK, December 16-This afternoon a political meeting was held at which the Minister of State, Mr. Hughes, the Chairman of the Japanese Delegation, Mr. Kato, and the Chairman of the British Delegation, Mr. Balfour, were present to discuss the question of the limitation of the Pacific. SENSIBLE DEATH Yesterday at 5 p.m., at the residence of the distinguished Guijirro-Cobián family, passed away the highly esteemed farmer Mr. Domingo Cobián Romeu. The death of this worthy gentleman has filled with sadness all the society of San Juan that always saw in Mr. Cobián an element of great value because of his beautiful personal gifts. The burial of the body will take place this afternoon at 4 o'clock, from Ja Fortaleza Street No. 19, to the Bayamon Cemetery. EL MUNDO sends to the relatives of the deceased gentleman its deepest condolences for the irreparable loss they are suffering. Today Premiere in Puerto Rico Jack PICKFORD in the drama in 6 acts Ladrón a la Fuerza Alonso Riera &co., Almacenistas, importadores y exportadores de Tabaco en Rama de todas clases y procedencias. OFFERS: Burlap (raw) for packing tobacco. Empty barrels for tobacco. Samson presses for packing tobacco. Empty sacks for sugar (next harvest). Prices on request. Warehouses and offices. "Tobacco Palace. San Juan, P. R. jNew York: 47 Washington St., San Juan.
Last night the ¡fez Aybar issued a warrant for the arrest of Mr. Jiménez Sicardó.
In response to rumors circulating last night that a warrant had been issued for the arrest of Mr. Jiménez Sicardó for failure to pay the fine imposed on him the day before yesterday for contempt of court, and in order to confirm the rumors, we contacted Judge Aybar, who confirmed the news. Mr. Jimenez," he told us, "led me to take this extreme attitude, due to his improper conduct towards the Court, and I had thought of pardoning him the fine as soon as he would give the Court satisfaction. Until this afternoon I have been waiting for the judgment to become effective or for the satisfaction to be given, and since he has done nothing in any respect and on the contrary has supplied the press with erroneous information of the incident, I resolved in compliance with the law to issue an order of encharmment against Mr. Jiménez Sicirdó. Anochfja the time we were informed of this matter the said order had not yet been complied with. According to reports we have, we are assured that Mr. Jiménez Sicardó, as soon as he is arrested, will file a writ of "Habeas-Cor. pus'' in order to regain his freedom I Prospá'oyHappy New Year wishes his" numerous and distinguished clients Miguel Savino and begs them to stop by this his house, where they will be treated with splendor. San Francisco 52. San Juan. LONDON, December 16.-The representatives of Ireland at the Conferences held in this City assure us that the Irish Parliament will ratify the Treaty, and that at the same time the English Parliament will approve the said Document. The alleged President of Ireland, Mr. De Valera, has just announced that the clauses of the Treaty of Lon dres will be submitted to a referendum and that he is sure that the Irish people agree with each and every chapter of the Treaty. The Irish newspapers published extensive editorials commenting with signs of intense rejoicing on the termination of the secular conflict that had always kept the inhabitants of England and Ireland in constant rivalry. THE ZAFRAN PLEBISCITE IS FAVORABLE TO HUNGARY. BUDAPEST, December 16.- The Government has published the preliminary result of the plebiscite in the Zafran region, showing an overwhelming majority in favor of Hungary. - LUNA Cinema Today Matinee and evening, premiere in Puerto Rico. The dramatic comedy, German, in 7 acts, entitled: "The Princess of the Nile" with the beautiful actress Lya Mara. Current prices. Great Event! "Memoirs of an Austrian Ballerina Extraordinary film by LYA MARA that has caused such an enormous sensation in our public. SOON ITS PREMIERE! Advt. -
The value of the St. John's proile has increased a lot.
Desirous of informing our readers of the result of the revaluation of property in San Juan, we visited the Treasurer, Mr. Benedicto, yesterday, who instructed Mr. Caparrós, a senior employee of that Department, to provide us with the data we requested. The figures, corresponding to the last three reassessments are as follows; from 1920 to 21, $54,958,351; from 1921 to 22, $60,818,501.00, and from 1922 to 23, that is to say the last reassessment made, amounts to $73,265,480.00. As the reader will see, the value of the property in San Juan has increased by $12,446,979. Now, as far as we have been informed, the "Board of Review and Equalization ' ' which has been meeting for some days now, may alter this result in any way, since 855 cases have been presented to it by persons who, it seems, are not in agreement with the reassessment that has been made. On the other hand, there have been 5135 who have signed, accepting the appraisal imposed on them. WAR BETWEEN PERU AND CHILE IS BELIEVED TO BE IMMINENT. NEW YORK, December 16.-Representatives of the Associated Press in Lima report that the Peruvian Government has decreed the general mobilization of its troops on the Chilean frontier. The dispatches add that the Peruvian multitudes are calling for war against Chile and that the whole country is rising up in enthusiasm to fight the common enemy of the country. The calculations that are made about the Peruvian army troops are extremely discouraging and it is presumed that in a decisive encounter the Peruvian troops will fight with an extremely superior enemy in number and material. The Chilean Government, in view of the seriousness of the situation, has ordered, according to reports received, the mobilization of its troops, cancelling military leave and calling back to barracks the soldiers who were on leave. DANCE IN SAN GERMAN The "Centro Criollo" of San German, will celebrate tonight in its halls a jarana-dance that promises to be very lucid. CARMEN CASTAINGS In 'n information that we published days ago on the occasion of the Evening, that was celebrated in the Municipal Theater last Thursday night, for the benefit of the Spanish Red Cross and under the auspices of the Knights of Columbus and Ladies Isabeli""is, in the list of ladies that had to sing the chorus of "Madame Butterfly", the name of Car men Cestero was put, instead of Ja sympathetic and beautiful Miss Carmen Castaings, that was the one that should have appeared. With this we make the above mentioned ration. Tomorrow Sunday Philippe Derblay o La Perrería de Pont-Avesnes drama in seven acts by Pina MENICHELLI MATINELLI MATINELLI. Pina MENICHELLI MATINAL AFTERNOON EVENING BASE-BALL We have just received the assortment of Base Ball effects we have been waiting for. PLACE YOUR ORDER ■ . - sues. FROM A. MAYOL & CO. San Juan. Puerto Rico.
Dr. Figueroa takes place against some Unionists.
(Open Letter) San Juan, P. K., Dec. 15, 1921. Mr. José L. Berrios, Yabucoa, P. R. Distinguished friend and valued co-religionist; Two are the motives that make me break the political silence in which I have been involved for some time; first, the courtesy of a reply that deserves such a respectable friend and such a prominent co-religionist as yourself, and second, to take advantage of this opportunity to make known to you that I am a friend and a prominent co-religionist. and secondly, to take this opportunity to state for the record that the statements that appeared in the important morning newspaper EL MUNDO, I never believed that they would be given 1% publicity, since they were made in an exchange of slight impressions with friends Vargas and Pietri, according to what they stated; but once published, I have nothing to rectify, but to say that for high political convenience for our party at the present moment, not only I did not say everything, but almost nothing, since the discretion of the position that I undeservedly occupy in the direction of the party, and against which I gave aeration in inopportune hour my nempafiarn Sr. Santini pronounces, demands of every good Unionist not to entertain himself in internal struggles in the bosom of our undefeated collectivity, when we need all our energies, and all our ardors to fight here in Puerto Rico and there in Washington, the disastrous man who in fateful and fatal hour was appointed to govern our angry and disgraced island. It is for this reason that I have kept silent in the face of manifestations not only of Mr. Santini, but of others of those who benefited most from the propaganda in favor of our independence, and with which we obtained such resounding triumphs in our island as to make our party an undefeated collectivity, in such a way that in order to attack it, our adversaries have had to go outside of it to attack it. We have just received Blanco Zinc Dos Leones Inglés and a large quantity of AD-EL-ITE paints and varnishes, corrugated zinc, concrete rods, black sanitary pipes from two to six inches, galvanized pipes, at extremely limited prices. J. CLIVILLES & CO SUCS. Tanca, esq. Tetuán Tel. 1108 Advt. plating and button lining. A. CARAZO, Brau St. 72.
The latest political events, in which have also played their role, some bad unionists eager for power and to satiate old personal bellies against the leading men of the party. You know them better than I do, some form ranks among their friends and I think they are even c*si their fellow citizens!!! I believe, my dear Dn. Pepe, that the moment is very near when we all have to speak loud, strong and clear, "not censuring without respect or consideration to discredit us for intrigue or dishonesty in our actions" as you say, but to avoid that by exploiting the silence and discretion that this terrible moment in the history of our party is demanding, the enemies from outside and inside it obtain pradicamen to the opinion, shining with a tinsel fatal to the aspiration truth of our people. And now, my respectable friend, let's move on to the two questions that you have to ask: why is Mr. Santini the only one who has not yet vindicated himself with the country, and why does he have to vindicate himself in the North? And what is the radical attitude assumed by Córdova Dávila? I will tell you the following; Mr. Santini is part of the Union Party Directorate, which is engaged in a campaign for the high interests of the party and even higher in the country; and in the mounts in which the leadership of the Party appoints a Committee, chaired by the Chief of the same and which must have all the moral and political endorsement of every Unionist.In the same way, Mr. Santini, who in the heart of the Central Board could have fought against the designation of the commissioners, did not do so, and then, two minutes before embarking for the North, he protested against the actions carried out by the Central Board, including the mistakes (according to him) up to the appointment of the Commission. Did Mr. Santini want that no Commission be appointed? Did Mr. Santini want the rights of the party and the interests of the country to be defended? If I will assume, then my dear Dn. Pepe. si/Ban tini, he has to vindicate himself of something, and very serious. And on the other hand, why come with that the party leadership was like a mixture of "oil and vinegar", when not only in the high (Continued on page twelve.) VULCANIZING PLANT We sell one, of the accredited Akron-Willlams mar- . ca, which is the best that is manufactured in this kind of apar:í "t It is still in its boxes, as received, from the United States. ABOY, VIDAL AND CO., INC. Miller" Building, San Juan, P. R.
OF INTEREST TO PHYSICIANS WE HAVE A SPECIAL EXHIBIT IN OUR BUILDING AT 82 DE LA FORTALEZA STREET, AND AMONG THE PRODUCTS WE EXHIBIT ARE TWO COMPLETE X-RAY-VICTOR INSTALLATIONS AND A "BALFOUR" OPERATING TABLE, OF THE TYPE USED BY THE MAY BROTHERS IN THEIR CLINIC IN ROCHESTER, MINN. IT IS OF INTEREST TO PHYSICIANS TO SEE ALL THE PRODUCTS WE ARE ALSO EXHIBITING. WE SELL EXCLUSIVELY QUALITY PRODUCTS AT MANUFACTURER'S PRICES. BE SURE TO VISIT O' NEILL-LLOMPART COMPANY FORTRESS NO. 82. SAN JUAN.
I t I Don Domingo Cobián y Romeu HAS DIED ■ His widow Mrs. Natalia Jiménez, his brothers Don Pedro, Mrs. I B Encarnación, Mrs. Carmen and Dofti María, nieces, nephews and other relatives, invite his friends to the conduction of his corpse from No. 19 Alien St. to the cemetery. 19 to the ce- j ■ menterio do Bayamón, which will have luffir today at four o'clock in the | I afternoon and beg to commend his soul to the Creator in | g their prayers.-No obituaries are distributed. |