EL MONDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 TeL 833 P. O. Box 345 I
MORNING DAILY, EXCEPT SUNDAYS,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
VubUakad and distributed andar paran" ÍM®. auteoriaad by the Aot ot oetobar 6, 1017, on Ala at Iba PoM tMfioa ot Ban Joan. Porto Bien. By ordit ot tbo Preaidont, A. B. BJ laaon, Postmaster Ganarsl. Enterad aa second class natter, february 11. 1011, at the Port Otica at fian Juan, Portn Jfi -n United States nt America tinder the Act ot march >■ 1ST!
SATURDAY, MARCH 12, 1921.
NUMBER 635.
Anti-'Reds' squadron bombards Retrograd.
St FEARS HUNGER EH SEVERAL POPULATIONS Df DUTCH ' -T"
(BY FRENCH CABLE) LONDON, Marzq 11.-Reports? received from Riga, say that eight warships of the Baltic fleet 'bombarded the capital of Russia, in which they spread terror among the "Reds", Five regiments of the garrison of Oranienbaum went over to the revolution, .after having killed the communist commissars. Reports from Finland say that the Finnish government has decreed the dissolution of Parliament for refusing to increase the salaries of public employees. GENERAL CROWDER THREATENS - HAVANA, March 11. - The United States pedal envoy, General Orowder, has visited during the day today the districts where the elections are to be held. The General has declared that if the spirits continue to be full of agitation, American troops will be landed to ensure order.
AMSTERDAM, March 11- Belinda has taken a dim view of the oeu pation of new German towns by the Allies, since Dutch > commerce, for the most part, depends on the Rhine district. However, some merchants believe that the Teutons will continue to send their goods to Holland by rail. Dutch newspapers attack,' the attitude of the Allies and assert that their advance will not improve their position. THE GREEKS CONTINUE TO ADVANCE ATHENS, Myrzo 11-The Greek army of operations in Smyrna has 1 occupied today the heights of Orlanza- i DUSSELDORF, (Germany), March 11.! The occupying forces have taken possession of the most important sites in the city, which remains cheerful and moving. The first to arrive i were the airmen, who were followed by the Franco-Belgian forces.
PONCE TAKES A WORTHY STEP IN FAVOR OF ART - / ' ; Only through a short interview held between Jas ladies and gentlemen who were summoned for the purpose, was constituted, on the night of last Monday, a group of enthusiastic elements of this cultured society, which will be devoted to the cultivation of the subli me art of melody, rhythm and harmony, powerful and suggestive means of expression of all feeling, under the name of "Philharmonic Club" It was not to be expected otherwise. Such a happy idea came from our particular friend Mr. José Miguel Morales, a gentleman of fresh and determined initiatives, a "dilettante" of exquisite taste for the divine musical art, a person of attractive and sympathetic personal influence; and it is clear, where others found inconveniences and impossibilities, he found the most flattering triumph that can crown the success of a fantasy, because everyone followed him, recognizing his praiseworthy # purpose of providing our social centers with a new and exciting attraction, revealing to the public a new and exciting attraction, revealing to the public a new and exciting attraction, revealing to the public a new and exciting attraction. The most flattering triumph that can crown the success of a fantasy, as all followed him, recognizing his praiseworthy intention to endow our social centers with a new and exciting attraction, revealing at the same time the progressive state of our artistic culture, and in reward for such magnificent work, he was unanimously appointed director-president of the "Philharmonic Club", believing him, certainly, very competent to eUq - I was in the rooms of the house of the respectable lady Doña Josefa Labarthe, widow of Neumann, who had the kindness and fine attention of .The importance of this first fundamental step in the existence of the "Philharmonic Club", and the excellent fruits of pleasant satisfaction, success and deep delight that it will produce in its associates and sympathizers, may never be erased in their memory. i Among the elements with which the "Club Filarmóni(Contlnúa en la página 6) TeaM "America" ¡ TONIGHT:- TWO TANDAS Debat de la Compañía de Zarsuela Española 50 ct*. Lunette. NOTE:-MATINAL Mitas "*. A resstos¿£*d* Mftsca, Mftxtte and olfi* that coscma ■ - * tota. SÉ RENT two rooms pira offices, good. Visit us Monday morning. M. T. STARK, INC. Cross 1. mfcl u Advt. *-.5 c
COKUOVA DAVILA HAS A DUTY TO BE EXPLICIT The President of the "Centro Portorriqueño'' operating in Cuba sends us, for publication, a copy of the following letter, addressed by that important organization, dated February 26, to the Commissioner of Puerto Rico in Washington, Lic. Felix Cordo Va Davila: "Havana, February 26, 1921. Honorable Félix Córdova Dávila, Resident Commissioner, Washington, D. C. Dear Sir: We enclose herewith a copy of the cablegram published by the newspaper EL MUNDO, in its edition of February 20, 1921, and reproduced by all the Press of this Republic, the text of which we commend to your attention. Apart from the fact that our Association is constituted exclusively for social and cultural purposes, it is natural that, as enthusiastic lovers of our homeland, we feel a lively interest in everything that directly concerns our beloved country, whether in the economic, political or social order. The news given to publicity and commented on unfavorably for Puerto Rico, by all the press of Cuba, has caused a deep impression and extra fleca; and the DIRECTORATE of this Center, aware of the ideals upheld by the Puerto Rican Party that brought you to the high position that you currently occupy, agreed, in an extraordinary session held recently, to address you in request of a formal statement in relation to the aforementioned news, so that we can deliver it to the Cuban press and thus disprove the erroneous impression that is currently held about El Pueblo Por Torriquefio. We take this opportunity to offer our most sincere respects and subscribe ourselves, Sincerely yours, Centro Portorriqueño DE CUBA, Arturo MORALES, President''. Here is a copy of the cablegram referred to in the letter: PUERTO RICO DOES NOT WANT LIBERTY. The Commissioner of Puerto Rico, Cordova, in a speech in the House said that the Puerto Ricans did not want it: i WASHINGTON, February 19.-The Commissioner for the island of Puerto Rico, Felix Cordova Davila, in a speech delivered before the House of Representatives, has called attention to the insidious propaganda which is being carried out in the House of Representatives, regarding the aspirations of all Puerto Ricans to be independent. (Oostteta in this page). / ' ■ ;'-.í
At his 11 cali* law office in San Justo, we visited Ledo Juan B. Soto, prominent "leader"-republican, and one of the intellectuals of the most salient knowledge and serene judgment. On seeing us enter,' our friend smiled, with a smile that we interpreted:--What will this one bring here"--almost nothing. To know his opinion on all these vital questions, which fill with great interest and great expectation the political moment we are living through. You know what we are referring to And before the Ledo. Soto "repusiena" of the onslaught, we asked him the first question ....... ¿-4- ' -I believe that long ago the Unionist party, watching over its own prestige, has had to define in a concrete way its political aspirations, maintaining an attitude * in harmony with its program. In fact, the Republicans, myself among them, have stated and will continue to state in various ways that we would never give our consent and assent to any form of definitive government for Puerto Rico that does not involve the full exercise of our sovereignty, and that we would never give our consent and assent to any form of definitive government for Puerto Rico. the full exercise of our sovereignty, although, as is well known, the Republican party assumes to exercise that sovereignty as a part of the United States of America, with the same rights, advantages and privileges inherent in any of the states which constitute the great republic of the North. i- ' ' - Undoubtedly the letter of Representative Towner has afforded an opportunity for the Union of Puerto Rj cp to adopt an attitude which will enable the country and the nation to know what is the status to which it aspires, in a clear, unambiguous manner, which will only serve to mislead the public. * . ? >--I can assure you it is true that a communication from - demanding from the party the abandonment of our constituted it in
a state of the republic of the North. This belief is absurd, for it is enough to read the letter of Judge Town i ner addressed to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House, to understand that what concerns American statesmen is not propaganda aimed at creating a pro-American sentiment as is the propaganda in favor of statehood, This is clearly implied by Judge Town Ner when he says in his letter that when the United States incorporated us by granting us citizenship, it was not believed that a secession movement could exist in Puerto Rico. Rico a lisp movement. To forbid or advise the Republicans to abandon their pro-statehood propaganda would be to work for the cessation of a movement absolutely opposed to that which, judging by the terms of the letter referred to, the American statesmen wish to see "end in Puerto Rico- And it is naive and even ridiculous that such action could be taken by a politician of Judge Towner's experience. i-" ? -The question is not easily answered. In the first place; Towner's letter does not order, but suggests an expedient, at] the same time that it sets forth or tradtíce what he PROBABLE INTERVENCÍj|N CUBA Says 1" Havana, with recommended Mitrados of the Tri appeals, ,ie ,*>Ví for the in order that of the public po, the United jlHKÍtoa Sak "1 oaso of cargt 'w cubwo, of Hcuqrdo with Flatt. F Mr, Walls U* in mirita 'special * Washington infonK Orow' It piúa botonea. ACABASm* St 72. Advt.
Interesting remarks by Ledo. Juan B. Soto about the political moment.
IT IS POSSIBLE--SAYS MR. SOTO--THAT THE EFFECT OF THE TOWNER'S LETTER WILL RESULT IN GREATER INDEPENDENCE ACTIVITY.
believes to be a general sentiment of the nation. Anyone who reads it carefully will notice that there are three fundamental thoughts or central ideas around which the author of the letter revolves. First, that independence or secession propaganda, as Towner calls it, does not please the American people. Second: that if this propaganda were insisted upon, and even as a reaction against it, the friends of Puerto Rico in Congress would find obstacles to any action or initiative they might wish to take for the benefit of the island. Third: that the general American sentiment, expressed through the two great national parties, is opposed to granting Puerto Rico the independence enjoyed by countries governed in accordance with the unitary regime. The tone of the letter is such that, as Mr. Barceló rightly said, it is the echo of a friendly voice which, I add, comes from a statesman who knows the circumstances and the thinking of the people in whose hands, by a decree of history, our political future lies. And there is no reason ! for equanimous spirits i to see in it an outrage which might '■ arouse a reaction in favor of I a more intense propaganda for I separation. However, since the popular mind is not given to analysis or calm reflection, is it possible that the effect of Judge Towner's hearing may result in more pro-independence activity? -What I believe with regard to the attitude of the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House, it is not easy for me to express to you with the conciseness demanded by an interview for publication in a newspaper, since it would oblige me to make personal allusions with reference to the gentlemen who hold such high offices, and I fear that, by dint of being brief, some of my views might be misinterpreted. However, in general terms, I will say that Mr. Barceló's attitude seemed to me to be very conciliatory; and, although there is much in his statements to which I, as a politician, could object, there is also much that I would dare to applaud. Mr. Coll's letter is a document that expresses a point of view.... (Continued on pg. 6a.) ■ . . i . . .
The comet "Pons-Winnecke "is approaching . us at 24 miles per second.
IF IT DOES NOT COLLIDE WITH THE EARTH, IT CAN CAUSE SERIOUS DAMAGE, BECAUSE IT IS FULL OF HOT AIR.
According to the most notable astronomers in the world, the comet "Pons-Winnecke" is over the orbit of the earth. June 24 of the present year is the date set for the collision with the earth. There is no certainty that this will happen, since everything depends on the position of the earth when this celestial warrior makes its change. When it approaches the earth, it will travel 24 miles per second, and will be surrounded by a great deal of very hot air. Professor Harold P Jacoby, head of the department of astronomy at Columbia University, says that there will certainly be no collision, since the odds are 999 to 1, and that the result will be a beautiful pyrotechnic display. The cloned professor says: "The comet "Pons-Winneke" resembles "Halley's" in that it is very faint and we may have to pass through the tip of the tail, and if we don't, we will no more realize when it passed us; and if we do, it will not ■ mean that it would end up with ;
The earth," continues the professed Ja coby, "is much larger than the comet, and a collision between the two would be like one between a sapphire and the Rock of Gibraltar; and, moreover, astronomers should thank the collision for giving them an opportunity to know something more about this class of meteors. "The name of the comet is derived from the name of two French savants who discovered it in 1819, and, since then, it is a well-known comet and has been frequently seen. It belongs to that class of comets famous for their pyrotechnic projection that appear every 20 years. It passes around the sun every three years and three certain years. "Its march across the sky will be so brilliant that everyone in the northern hemisphere will be able to see it. The "Pons-Winnecke' ' differs from most comets in that instead of having an extremely long tail, it has a series of meteors five or six hundred miles long, which will make it a path full of splendor, which will make telescopes unnecessary to see it."
This professor will contemplate ! comet from' the observatory of the University of Colombia, and it is hoped that there will be a better opportunity for it than that afforded on the night when Halley appeared to us. It is hoped that people fearful of this kind of meteors are not as fearful as they were during the last one, when hundreds of people were seen in consternation, the squares were full, and everyone believed in the end of the world, so they prepared for the hour of repentance. For many centuries people have feared a collision between a comet and the earth, but thanks to the advances of astronomy, it is known that the adventurers of space are laofen sivos. The tails of comets are made up of different gases, which to some degree and several thousand kilometers thick, form a water-like atmosphere that is transparently like water. The light of the comet does not burn and is a kind of phosphorescence, caused by the electro-magnetic rays of the sun; and, therefore, we should not expect any rain of fire.
General Gomez has adopted a firm resolution
THE DATA HAS BEEN THREATENED FOR SOME TIME NOW.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) - HAVANA, March 11-The head of the Liberal party has decided to recommend to his supporters to abstain from going to the schools. General Gomez has published, on this occasion, a vigorous letter, in which he states that, in order to prevent blood from continuing to flow profusely, he withdraws his candidacy. If the central committee of the party does not approve his resolution, - the General adds, - he is determined to leave the island without giving further explanations MADRID, March 11.-The assassins conspired some months ago against the life of Mr. Dato, according to manifestations of his relatives, who have shown much anonymity to the authorities. A few days before the assassination, he was told that there was a conspiracy against his life and that of the King. In spite of this, Mr. Dato did not want to be protected by the police, 1 and stated that he would face the danger, completely alone. MEANS TO COMBAT THE BUBONIC PESTA ON THE ISLAND Añasco, Puerto Rico, March 9, 1921 ¡ Señor Director of EL MUNDO, San Juan Dear Editor: In the lanwn|abie epidemic outbreak in that capital, which is spreading so hotly throughout the island, according to the number of infected rats in different populations, I have seen with regret that, apart from the campaign against these rodents, no attempt has been made to enlighten the crowds in the most rudimentary aids that they should take as preservatives to avoid probable attacks of infection. It is certain, Mr. Director, that nowadays vaccination meets all the needs, being as it is of effective results and easy application, but as the procedure is somewhat slow, even to the extreme, and epidemics are very quick to spread, I think it appropriate that every person who has knowledge in this matter should lend his assistance to help the ignorant masses, as long as the preventives he recommends are ino fersive and easy to apply. I was in Greytown (San Juan del Norte) when the plague epidemic invaded the entire region from Mexico, through the Pacific, to Panama, and from there to Colon, the Atlantic port. The government of Nicaragua, whose President was Don José Santos Zelaya, ordered me to isolate our northern port, and in view of the prolongation of the epidemic, the following year, that is, in nineteen hundred years, I went on a study commission to Mazatlan, a population really hit by the plague. As vaccination was not practiced at that time, disinfection was the ideal of preservatives and the formulas that accompanied the Director were very well known: "Powders for use on the whole body; Bi-borate of soda, 10 parts. White oxide of Zinc, 10 parts. Talc, 100 partez. (Perfumed with 10 drops of Neroli or Lemon) This is extremely cheap and can be used profusely all over the cuer pof it adheres perfectly because of the oxidq of zinc, and fleas are driven away because of the borax, which is the bl-bo-(Continued on 4a. page) r FvictorygardenI i::: - - - o ¡ * Today SATURDAY Today <" J ► Oper* Cinematographic ¡ ¡ ¡ K "The Marriage of H Figaro" ¡ ¡ [ with mú.ie* by MOZART < > ' * * * teda orquaet* ¡ ' < ► Conductor MAESTRO T1ZOL < >
The presidents of all the Spanish societies, the President of the Republic, the secretaries of the Cabinet, the diplomatic corps and an immense crowd went to the Spanish Legation, for the purpose of paying their condolences to the representative of the referred country, A BEAUTIFUL TELEGRAMA FROM THE KING OF BELGIUM Madrid, March 11.-King Alber to, of Belgium, has sent a touching telegram to King Don Alfon so XIII on the occasion of the dreadful crime committed in the person of Mr. Dato, whom he greatly admired-- ¡ says the King during his stay in ■. Madrid. The corpse was exposed in capií Ha ardent, in the same residence of the illustrious finadolos Ministers, Ambassadors and numerous crowd paraded before him IN AGUADILLA ' SOSPICIOUS RATS ARE FOUND The newspaper "La Union", of Agua dilla, says that in different streets of }>.queHa city, have been found ' dead rats, which have presented buboes of -suspicious appearance, which has thought in a possible in vasion of li epidemic. Yesterday we were informed by Dr. Ortiz, of the Department, that he examined the case reported as suspicious in the person of Leocadio Canjicho, employee in the elevator of the Palace", resulting in a negative result. The buboes presented by Camacho are of a different nature, having been proved by the expert examination that the inflammation of the lymph nodes of the alleged patient has no relation whatsoever to the prevailing epidemic, which we informed the residents there, who were somewhat alarmed yesterday. FUMIGATION OF BOATS Yesterday the steamers "Lake Galate" and "John S- Emery" were fumigated by the Navy. All ships docking at the wharves have been fumigated. -All rats appearing on board are examined by the Laboiutorio. To date no suspicious rats have been found, apart from that of the steamer "Marina" - The Maritime Health Department has appointed several inspectors to watch the ships docked night and day, to see if they comply with all the requirements of the quarantine regulations - The ships that make the crossing between San Juan and the other ports of the island are also fumigated. A RUBBER WAS TAKEN Alejandro Santini, of Vega Baja, reported to the San Juan police that a rubber was stolen from his car. Today- Puerto Rico Premiere -Today Vivían Martin Harrison Ford in the suggestive comedy in 5 acts: "El Tercer Beso" Prices Corrientes Grandes Regatos on Thursday. OF GENERAL INTEREST Today's IJHCO PROGRESS PORTp (in English) contains articles by Mr. Coll, Mr. Huyke and Mr. Barceló. 1 Advt.