THE WORLD
Offices; Salvador Brau, 8f Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
MORNING JOURNAL,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS *-- a mi" - "i- - "K. -----
ARO III
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
RESOLUTION APPROVED BY THE ASSOCIATION OF TOBACCO GROWERS OF SAN JUAN.
WHEREAS, the current economic crisis is deepening with each passing moment and there is no likelihood that tobacco farmers, generally speaking, if forced to sell before July, will be able to obtain a price for their respective crops that will be sufficient to pay even fifty percent of their debts: WHEREAS it is true that the tobacco growers, generally, are not in reality ruined, since last year they made good sales and ( they comfortably paid off their com , premises; but it is perfectly clear, ] that the proceeds of their ( crops not being sufficient to cover fifty per cent. of their debts, if to cover the other fifty . account per cent. should they be compelled to divest themselves of their property, within , the present depreciation of all va. lors, the total ruin of that source of rl- { queza would be inevitable, many agricul. The total ruin of this source of income would be inevitable, many farmers would totally lose their land, a serious paralysis of business would ensue in many important municipalities of the island, hunger would be a sure prey for the one hundred Puerto Rican families that are sustained by this crop, and it is unquestionable that the economic situation of the island would be worse than that of the rest of the island. The effects of such a situation would unquestionably extend to all the living forces of the country, WHEREAS, the tobacco farmers, constituted as a legal Association, composed of a Central Committee and fourteen Local Boards, which operate in as many municipalities of the island, after having deliberated judiciously and de. After having deliberated judiciously and thoroughly, in three successive assemblies, on the serious situation posed. WHEREAS, it is reasonably understood that even within the existing economic crisis, the price of 36 cents per pound of Puerto Rican tobacco is the minimum at which it should be quoted, since there is a need for it in the market and no other domestic tobacco can substitute for it, being covered from foreign competition by the current price of thirty-five cents per pound of tobacco, and no other domestic tobacco can substitute for it, being covered from foreign competition by the current price of thirty-five cents per pound. WHEREAS, the current tariff of thirty-five cents per pound is in force. WHEREAS, if the tobacco farmers could wait to sell their respective crops, two or three months, while the stocks still remaining from the previous year in the United States market are being realized, or while a project currently being considered by the Association to take the present crop directly to that market and offer it there to manufacturers and industrialists, eliminating intermediaries at once, surely the situation would be satisfactorily resolved to the satisfaction of all. NOW, THEREFORE, Be it resolved by the Tobacco Growers Association of Puerto Rico: FIRST: To submit for the consideration of the Banks, Commerce and any Society or person having matured or soon to be matured claims on tobacco growers, the following proposal: (a) That the following proposal be granted: (i) That the Tobacco Growers Association of Puerto Rico, for the consideration of the Banks, Commerce and any Society or person having matured or soon to be matured claims on tobacco growers, be granted the following proposal (a) That tobacco farmers be granted a period of six months for the payment of their respective debts; (b) That the interest to be charged for this period shall not exceed the rate incurred on the original obligations; (c) That in order to obtain this concession, the farmer shall offer his creditors security for the full value of his tobacco and other property in his possession; (d) That any farmer obtaining extensions of this nature shall, nevertheless, be subject to the obligation to sell his tobacco individually and to pay his debts as soon as he receives such extensions; (e) That any farmer who obtains such extensions shall, however, be subject to the obligation to sell his tobacco individually and to pay his debts as soon as he receives them; (f) That any farmer who obtains such extensions of this nature shall, however, be subject to the obligation to sell his tobacco individually and to pay his debts as soon as he receives them. (d) That if before the month of September, the sale of the greater part of the crop under cultivation has not been effected, the farmers will refrain from sowing in the present year, in order to give the opportunity to extinguish the old stock and, by such means, make the article more expensive; SECOND: If the proposition to be made in the present year, the farmers will not be obliged to sell their tobacco, and, by such means, to pay the price of the article; SECOND: If, in the event of the sale of the crop in the present year, the farmers do not sell their tobacco, they will not be obliged to sell their tobacco.
Cinema Mente Cario and Real Mañana Domingo. Royal program. Two Tandas for 25c. with dot different films. First Tanda: Li Hang the Cruel or* The Sacrificed Hila Second Tanda: "The Marriage of Chapita" At' 4 P. M. Grand Matinee.
SATURDAY, JUNE 4, 1921.
~ te WWW ww eew wwwgggg w, zwiv The Allies continue to study the grave question of Upper Silesia.
THE REAL CAUSE OF THE 'DISTURBANCES IN UPPER SILESIA.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) PARIS, June 3-Important per sonalities in official and military circles, both in France and in England, continue to discuss the problem of 11 Upper Silesia. MORE HONORS TO THE UNKNOWN SOLDIER PARIS, June 3-The Crown Prince of the Japanese throne has laid , a wreath at the tomb of the Unknown Soldier, at the Arc de Triomphe. p , In the course of the ceremony, d'.jo ( that the Soldier represented not only the heroes- who fell in the paid conflagration, but also all the sacrifices of the defenders.
MAXIMILIANO RfiARDEN EL0G$$. A FRANCE BERLIN, June 3-The Correspondent of the "Excelsior" newspaper, Paris, held an interview with Maximilia no Harden, who paid obeisance to the actit d of France. The illustrious "German journalist expressed that France has suffered muclp on account of the war, but that at present it is, by many means, more militaristic than Germany, and that it is content only to claim, an indemnity for damages sufferedTermi'/ó <|that if Germany had won, France would be crushed, owing .to Is demand d 1 ex-Imperium, and that he hopes for early economic rapprochement between the two nations. LISONJAS A BULK COBLENZA, jíriq, 3-At a banquet given by the high commission of the Rhine provinces, M. Barthou highly praised the American people ,as well as the Belgian and English people- z BRIANEk CALLS FOR t,A UNIFICATION OF MARKETS * -L-Íh BERLIN, June 3-A-E.he newspaper "Le Journal," of the Pans, says that the le*ma sent by Germany to France on the occasion of the note, from M. -Briand,, fúndase in the unification of the markets, in agreement with the German government.
PARIS, June 3--At a session of the Chamber of Deputies the representative for the Meuse district has stated that the disturbances in Upper Silesia are due to the actions of the Allied governments, as well as to rumors concerning the division of the disputed lands between Germany and Poland. < LONDON, June 3. Rumors have been circulating in this city which have caused a great sensation, because the Silesian workers have sent for the second time a message to the Supreme Council in which they make known their decision about the problem of Upper Silesia. According to the workers' message, they are not determined to allow themselves to be governed by the German government, for they say that this would be an esela- j vitude. They have threatened, as they did in the first message, to blow up bridges and mines in order to throw the mining industries of the rich disputed region into chaos. 1 THE SITUATION "N THE DREARY BERLIN, June 3-A dispatch from Warsaw makes known the true siuation in Upper Silesia. The miners, according to the dispatch, are not working, and the railroads refuse to transport all kinds of goods. The Polish government troops have been forced to bring war supplies to the border, as there was no one who could do it, since most of the railroad employees were Germans. The Warsaw government is anxiously awaiting the decision of the Supreme Council, so that this problem can be definitively solved. THE LCDO. ENRIQUE DIAZ VIERA The Supreme Court has just reversed the judgment rendered by the District Court in the case of Carmelo Dre. cot, for infraction of the arbitration law, ordering the release of the accused. We congratulate & our friend the talented lawyer Mr. Enrique Diaz Viera for this new triumph.
EMPLOYEES WILL NOT HAVE THEIR SALARIES LOWERED
A commission of the "Employees Association", composed of Luis Cuevas Zequeira, Ricardo Caparrós, L. F. Ma. 1 chicote and Ramón Lebrón was conferring with the Governor, regarding the salaries of the employees, as well as all the bills that favor the employees and that have been submitted to the consideration of the Legislature. The Governor told the visitors that he had recommended the matter to the Senate Finance Committee, and that his impression, after their recommendations, was favorable to the employees, inasmuch as he believes that the salaries of the employees will not be lowered during the coming year. The Commission was very well impressed with the interview with our first civil authority. We have reports that the same Commission has requested a hearing of the "Senate Finance Committee" and of the President of the High Corps, in order to discuss the same matters. According to an interview held by the Deputy Chief of Labor with Mr. Santon, representative to the House and chairman of the House Legal Committee, the bill on life insurance, etc., has been favorably reported to the House by that Committee and will be discussed in the near future. GRAVE RUMORS IN FAJARDO Last night there were insistent rumors circulating in San Juan that in Fajardo, on the occasion of the Socialists' inauguration, a serious clash had occurred between Unionists and Socialists, resulting in two deaths and several wounded. From Fajardo we were informed that nothing had happened and that they were false- z CABLE DE AZUCAR They sold today: 4,500 sacks of Puerto Rico at $4.77; 21,000 sacks of Puerto Rico at $4.75 and 2,750 tons of Stoi Domingo at $3.00. They are offering 10,000 bags of Puerto Rico at $4.70. AT THE "CASINO DE PTO- RICO" Tomorrow, at half past 4 o'clock in the afternoon, a splendid "tea-dansint" will be held at the "Casino de Puerto Rico", which promises to be one of the best held by that center up to date, given the enthusiasm there is for attending it.
The Borda marriage or the Court ofFeffal
Yesterday morning, Judge Odlin of the Federal Court issued a lengthy opinion in the case of Borda v. Borda. This case arose out of a suit brought by Mrs. Borda against her husband, Mr. W. Neeslao Borda, some months ago. The Court dismissed the suit on jurisdictional principles, since there is no precedent in the Federal Courts for a wife to bring suit against her husband under the conditions and circumstances of the present case. The Court stated in the decision that in the event that the divorce proceedings, currently pending, were decided in favor of the plaintiff, she was then entitled to re-file the now dismissed suit. .THE NATIONAL GUARD IS GOING TO A CAMP IN ARECIBO Mr. Acosta, from the office of the Ayu dante General, informs us that near the beach of Arecibo a camp will be established for the 'Guardia Nacional*, which will be attended by soldiers from San Juan, Bayamón, Lares, San Sebastián, Mayagüez, Cabo Rojo, San Germán, Sabana Grande, Yauco, Peñuelas, Ponce and Hu macao, as well as members of the cavalry corps, which will be equipped with excellent horses; that, in accordance with the new organization, there will be three companies of ametrators. The number of soldiers attending the camp will be about 1,500.
If, however, it is not hereby accepted, and if nothing else is proposed to prevent or remedy the disaster which threatens us; if, over and above the misfortune of the farmers and the right to life of one hundred thousand Puerto Rican families, the interest of those who are sadly mistaken in believing that by violence they will collect their credits, should manifest itself inflexible and sordid; if in this way it will lead us to an irremediable bankruptcy, the Tobacco Growers' Association declares, with all responsibility, that it will vigorously advise the farmers and their families to take the necessary measures to avoid the disaster; that it will strongly advise the farmers to submit voluntarily to the sale of their crops at a price of less than thirty-five dollars per hundredweight under any pressure whatsoever; and that they will coolly and resolutely endure the violent action of judicial foreclosure of their farms and their homes, with the decision and serenity of men who have a just and humane concept of duty.
Teatro America TODAY REAPPEARANCE OF THE DUETTO TODAY Muñoz - Manzano y E>tr*no en Puerta Ripo d" la Comedia Dramática UN LADRON EN LA CASA by Edmundo Lowe and Vola Vale LUNETA 30 cte.
Universal Film Co. presents tomorrow Sunday at the 'Teatro Rialto' the beautiful production La Esposa Incógnita by the papular 'Edith Roberts'.
I LLEGO LA GASOLINA 1 "MOTORINA" > STUBBE BROS, INC. SAN JUAN, P. R.
Tomorrow Sunday:- Matinal ron the movie of the Night. Matine" with episodes 3 and 4 of "La Gran 'ugada". In the evening the film "LOS FALSIFICADORES" and the Duett MuñozManzano. LUNETA 30 cts. -
Maximilian Harden pays obeisance to France.
'INPORTANT CONFERENCES PARIS, June 3.-The newspaper "Le Petit Journal" highlights the conferences held between the Italian and French representatives about the transaction project. On this occasion, M. Briand and Bonin Longare, Italian Ambassador in this city, have held several interviews. A GREAT SERVICE TO FRANCE LONDON, June 3-- Lord Curzon is at pains to bring out the . great services rendered to the cau ( sa of France by Lord Abernon, em ( bajator of Great Britain in Berlin . - i
GREAT TRIUMPH OBTAINED BY A YOUNG PUERTO RICAN.
Extending what we said in one of our last editions, we may add the following: "Approximately five ] years ago, there arrived in Baltimore (one of the best educational centers in America) the talented young Puerto Rican Don Osca< G. Costa, who had just graduated from the "Central High School" in San Juin, where he won the "salutatorium," one of the highest honors in the class. ■ Young Costa enrolled in the ] College of Medicine of the University of Maryland, obtaining "1 highest average of a very.nu- ¡ mous class in the "pre-medical" course , In succeeding years, young Co? ta continued to be the class valedictorian and the most popular among his numerous classmates - and in the year just ended he held his fi.ma to even greater heights, being awarded the gold medal offered by the faculty of the institution to the best student in the five courses of the course. But the most remarkable thing is that none of the students, who in the years prior to the present, obtained that medal, since the university was founded, achieved more brilliant grades than the current doctor in medicine and surgery Mr. Oscar G- Costa. This is how we can truly demonstrate to the United States that in Puerto Rico there are brains as admirably well organized as in any state of the great Republic. That is why the triumph of young Costa, to whom EL MUNDO offers its most sincere and enthusiastic congratulations, is not only a magnificent personal triumph, but a splendid victory for Puerto Rico". THE LAWYER JOSE A BALSEIRO This is what we can call, lawyer, the very distinguished young man and good friend of ours, who, after difficult studies at the University of Puerto Rico, in which he has highlighted his powerful intelligence and his firm will, will receive on Wednesday, the 8th, the diploma corresponding to the degree of Bachelor of Laws, from the referred FacultyPepito Balseiro appears occupying the first place, which is of honor, in the luxurious programs announcing the "Seventeenth Annual Commencement", which we have received. Receive Mr. Balseiro our most enthusiastic congratulations. f A CHILD RUN OVER In Ponce, a carriage driven by Manuel Rodriguez ran over a child, Andres Muñoz, who was taken to the hospital. Victory Garden Today Premiere Today In Santurce of : 'SATAN DICTATOR' Extraordinary Prices PBOGBAMA STUBBE
9 IN "SOVIET" RUSSIA, DE-NATIONALIZATION BEGINS
All the news coming from the interior of Russia to the surrounding nations, coincide in the extreme that the situation there is of acute gravity, which increases in a sensible way every day that passes, due to the clumsiness of the men who are at the head of the destinies of the country. The confirmatory testimonies of such a state of affairs are irrecusable, because they do not come from entities or persons interested in further muddling the chaotic environment in which the blind and fanatical utopians are tenaciously struggling, but from impartial and truthful personalities returning from Russia to Finland from missions or from those who are at the head of public services by appointment of the "Soviets". If such information were to come from less pure or even doubtful sources, it could be accepted with natural reservations until such time as it was duly contrasted by evidence which did not admit of the slightest dispute. But no one will challenge the statements of the Minister of Finland in Moscow, Mr. Ahonen, who has just arrived in Helsingtors, nor those of Mr. Nolde, the expert adviser to the "Soviets" in the textile industry. The former says that as a result of the shortage of combatant are "hnuititttd d" factories:-w ¡ Red Russia. Mr. Nolde, adviser to the Soviets, has told him that, while the average annual production of textiles in 1917 was about 50,000 tons, in 1918, the first textile production was about 50,000 tons. In 1918, the first year of the Soviet Government, it fell to 25,000 tons, and in the last year to 13,000 tons. As the reduction of labor which threatens the existence of the Russian textile industry is due mainly to the reluctance of the villagers to cultivate the land because of the exac- | 1 tions of the Government in its compulsory requisitions and which has caused the area of cultivated land to be reduced from 2,000-000 acres (the acreage of land under cultivation) to 2,000-000 acres (the acreage of land under cultivation), it has been found that the average annual production of the Russian textile industry in 1917 was 50,000 tons.000-000 acres (the ru- ' so acre is about 40 areas, as in England) to 300.000, and it is expected that it will fall still further, Mr. Nol- I de has recommended to the Communist chiefs that without loss of time they should proceed to the denationalization of the textile industries. A particular Company the supply of fuel for the railroads, and that this measure would be the first step to be (Continued on page eight.)
Today. Grand Aeonteeimiento- Today. - ARCELAY FILM CO. presents the super-production WOMEN AND MEN OR THE TWO DESPOTS. Starring the beautiful RAYE DANE. Extraordinary Prices.
FOR RENT In the TOBACCO PALACE, a spacious premises, suitable for offices; (at present occupied by Messrs. Wm. M. Garic and Co.), for reports:: ALONSO RIERA and Co. Telephone 527. Ban Juan, P. R. AflVt Buttons are plated and lined. A CARAZO, Brau St 72. AdvL
~ ii ii ni Jtatriltetea wh ant) wifeeriMS by tb" kat "t "etotar & ISIT, "a gle tke Fwí üí*e" -/ Sea )<*", Porto Biso. By arta ef tho ProoKoat, A. S. B*r leson, Poavaaotor GommL Botarte es moo "4 slow matter H - o. mine "" 4>. Otter "t flan Jasa, Porto $1 in Hnitod States n* Amerite rtiSrr tas Aet ef merefi t tBTt.
I NUMBER 708.
NEW TREATMENTS TO CURE INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
A Spanish physician, who is in Paris, and who wishes his name not to be known, has made these interesting statements, which, because they are of general interest, since they deal with a new treatment for infectious diseases, are published in this issue. For some time I have been employing a special method in the treatment of infectious diseases, with truly marvelous results. The method has a rational and scientific basis, and the clinic responds to a greater degree than could be expected from the theory. The method, by its essence, is applicable to all congestive infectious diseases, and even to different ones. 1 . The diseases in which there has been occasion to employ it, and in which it has always given the same qualitative result, have been: 1, pulmonary tuberculosis; 2, intestinal tuberculosis; 3, pneumonia; 4, bronchopneumonia; 6, influenza in various forms; 6, puerpe" ral septicemia; 7, pleurisy; 8, peritonitis; 9, typhoid fever; 10, angina; 11, diffuse phlegmon; 12, suppurative otitis; 13, laryngeal diphtheria; 14, acute bronchitis; 16, chronic bronchitis; 16, hemoptysis; 17, acute articular rheumatism; 18, chronic articular rheumatism; 19, rheumatism ! gonococcal rheumatism; 20, puerperal jclampsis; 21, intestinal colic; 22, rebellious vomiting ;of pregnancy; 23, coqueluche ; I have used the treatment in meningitis, without ever finding the slightest beneficial result. The treatment is simple and the most harmless of all those that have been employed up to the present day; in 600 times that there has been occasion to put it into practice, no unpleasant accident has ever occurred. Given the way the treatment works, it is understandable why meningitis is not cured. f It can be erfiple'10 misttio'tm the first months of life q. in Im older ages. Statistical and comparative summary of some of the diseases in which it has been employed. i Typhoid Fever. -In the years from 1908 to 1918, in the place where I practice, several deaths occurred, and the time employed in the cure of those who did not die was from four to five weeks, and the convalescence as long. In the year 1919 I treated by my special method 11 cases, of which ten were cured, and the one who died was because he did not want to submit to my treatment. In 1920 I treated another epidemic; of the eight cases I treated, all were cured within three or four days, and the convalescence was very rapid. -i PUERPERAL SEPTICEMIA - From the year 1908 to 1916 there were 18 cases with ten deaths, and the eight cured cases took from fifteen to twenty days to cure. From 1916 to 1921, when I used the new treatment, there were no deaths. the cure took four days. I treated 14 cases. I FLU - I have had occasion to treat 34 cases of influenza pneumonia and bronchopneumonia and two cases of the nervous form of the same disease, and all were cured in two or three days. The only patient who did not carry out my treatment died. I PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS - I have treated cases, of which one has been cured; another almost cured; I could not complete the cure because the patient was absent, and three deaths in which I began treatment at such an advanced stage of the disease that no beneficial result was to be expected. - Two cases. Two cures. Thus I could continue to review the diseases I have treated ....", says in his writing Dr. X * who, as can be seen, should be put in a position to make a more abundant experience.
IF NEEDED i Galvanized corrugated iron i Galvanized barbed wire Twisted square rods Wood in general. >. Call 1 Compañía Industrial de Santurce PEDRO BOLIVAR, S. sn C. Phone 425. P.O. Box 250. SAN JUAN. , . Advt,