ELMUNDO
- piglriM 3 ctv", u Pi Semester, $4.03 I A high, $.7.50 ■
PlWmwl jdhñU r Wrafoi BnOi H v Tel, $33 P. O. Box 343.
f H MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS 'XT'WUWW
AHO III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
TubUsbed and distributed nadar permit (No. 801) suíhoriieíby the Art oí oetober 8, 1B1T, on fila a* the Poet Offioe ef San Juan, Porto Bioo. By order of the President, A. 8- Burleson, Postmaster General. Entered aa second class matter, Feb. 31. 1010. at the Post Office at flaa Juan, Porto Ri co. UniteJ States of America under the Act of march 8. 1870.
I| SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 1921.
NUMBER 785.
The new Bishop of Puerto Rico is a very eminent man.
Through the mediation of Mr. Noble, most worthy English Consul in San Juan de Puerto Rico, we have received the following notes, sent to us by Bdo. Frank Colon, very dear rector who was rector of the church of Santa Ana, in this capital, and who is now in New York, about the outstanding merits and the excellent virtues that the new and illustrious Bishop of this diocese has: "The Church of Puerto Rico is very happy with the appointment of its third Bishop since the American occupation, in the very distinguished person of Bdo. George C. Caruana. Born on the island of Malta, on April 23rd, eighteen hundred and eighty-two, the new Prelate completed his academic studies with honors at the College of the Jesuit Fathers. Jesuit Fathers. Later, faithful to the divine voice, he opened a world full of promises, to devote himself entirely to the ecclesiastical career. Loving study and gifted with an intelligence as brilliant as it was solid, he received at Boma the degrees of Doctor of Philosophy and Doctor of Divinity. For about five years he filled the office of Secretary to the wise and pious Apostolic Delegate of the Philippines, mon , Mr. Agiere, with great discretion and prudence, winning the admiration and confidence of all the clergy. On the death of Monsignor Agiere, Father Caruana accepted, with all humility, the office of Pastor of St. Leo, in the village of Corona, in the diocese of Brooklyn, filling the last post to the general satisfaction, and winning the affection of Protestants and Catholics. On the declaration of war by the United States against Germany, Father Caruana offered his services, as a chaplain, to the Government, which accepted them with joy. Recently, he was honored with the position of private secretary to His Eminence the new Cardinal of Philadelphia. In addition to the beautiful Spanish language, which he speaks perfectly, the new Prelate speaks different languages. It is not surprising, then, that a career so full of piety, knowledge, pru dence and experience, has drawn the attention of Boma to him, who is an eminent man. The Diocese of Puerto Bico should congratulate itself with the appointment of such an enlightened priest, both the parishioners and the Clergy; especially the Clergy, who will find in Father Caruana not only an able and confident Director, but, above all a good man, *very good in a word, according to the old Spanish saying: "a man of God". Theater "America" Today Saturday great success "LA GASA DEL BAÑISTA" Color film. A work by Alexandre Dumas Jr. Also "Los Viveskis" and "Linda Sofia". Tomorrow premiere: "THE POOR NICOMEDES" "LOS VIVESKIS" Monday: THE BLACK PRINCESS Every night cinema and variety.
COMMERCIAL COURSES "Gregg" Shorthand, Typing, Bookkeeping, Business Correspondence and Office Practice. Instruction in English and Spanish. Competent teachers. All courses can be completed in one year. Come study in Ponce; prepare yourself to be a man of the future. You can start classes at any date. Elegant graduation diploma. More than 300 girls and young women are constantly studying in this school. COLEGIO PERCY Ponce, P. R. z
ZINC ACANALADO | fi 7 - Q Q Ift ' CEMENTO CANADA i Ferreteria Merino
ON THE "CASACAS" 6 AMERICAN TEACHERS ARRIVED On the steamer "Caracas" which arrived from New York six American teachers arrived who are to practice in P. B. The following are their names: Edgar Huston, Lucile Eeamey, Myrtle Campbeel, Gertrude Bedford, Kathryn Bedford and Raymond Schaening. Yesterday these teachers visited the Department of Instruction and conferred at length with the Deputy Commissioner regarding the new school year, for which they bring their best wishes to work. Mr. Vizcarrondo informed a reporter from EL MUNDO yesterday that in the next steamer the other American teachers hired by the Department will arrive on the island.
"Rialto" Premiere in Puerto Rico The great dramatic production. Midnight Romance by popular star Anita Stewart Current Prices Mañana Domingo 'Short Skirts' Gladys Walton
THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE "ZAPATO DB LOS NIÑOS POBBE8" We have received the annual report of the "Zapato de los Niños Pobres," corresponding to the year 1920-21, in which the President of the aforesaid institution gives an account of the work done by the Board. In the message, the president, who is the learned and prestigious gentleman Mr. Alej andró Reina, gives the most expressive thanks to EL MUNDO, for having always lent its columns to the propaganda of the mentioned Society. 1 Our greatest wish for the "Poor Children's Shoe" is that, in the altruistic work it pursues, it may always find the generous hearts of all Puerto Ricans.
Can the case of a "floating canteen" near Puerto Rico be made?
The question that we title this information was asked, by letter, in these days, to our editor Sy. Ba Ramirez Eran, so that our colleague could find the means to answer it, to the satisfaction of some more or less 'wet' reader. A case of this nature is similar to the one recently reported in the American press in these or similar sentences: "In the vicinity of Atlantic City outside the three-mile limit, a "floating canteen" has sprung up on the schooner "Marshall" of Gloucester, Mass., under the command of Captain Eric Anderson, who claims to have three thousand cases of Scotch whiskey of the best quality and a good supply of gin. The captain bartender says he is willing to sell his precious liquor to anyone who will pay the stipulated prices. He recently issued a message to all the inhabitants of Atlantic City, in general, and since that day a continual exodus of thirsty persons, in vessels of all companies, has been in search of the "fountain of life-giving waters." Yesterday morning a reporter of ours visited Mr. Pesquera, Chief of Prohibition, in order to know if, like "over there" here we could also have a "floating canteen" three miles from the coast, without implying a violation of the Volstead Act. Our discussion with Mr. Pesquera was very cordial, and although he did not tell us anything concrete, we drew some conclusions.... The opinion of the Director of Prohibition in this case would be against the establishment of such an original "cabaret", because whether three, one, or twenty miles from the coast, it would constitute a violation of the "dry" law. - Ah! .... And the freedom of the seas, is it a myth? -This case," Mr. Pesquera seemed to think, "is identical to that of an individual who, on the assumption that the street is free, would place himself in front of our house and make us the object of his mockery and "jokes" ..... The owner of the house would take care of finding the means to drive him away. -From agreement .... But to be specific in the case of the "cantina" of reference.... Mr. Pesquera's attitude, we think, would be to apprehend "the body of the crime" and cable Washington to solve it..... And since the case is new, it would depend on Washing ton that many citizens of Puerto Bico, made "dry" by the force of a Law, would cross the three miles to "get wet" for the pleasure, perhaps exposing themselves to the risk that in the middle of the way the Pesquera's submarine would pass by them. THE EMPLOYEES OF THE BARBERSHOP "EL FIGARO'' REFUSE TO WORK NEXT MONDAY because it is LABOR DAY. For which reason it will not be open. Pedro Trujillo Guil. Buttons are pledged and lined. A CARAZO, Brau St 72.
Important resolution of a San Juan club, making the Governor an honorary member, and in which very serious accusations are
in which very serious accusations are made against the government, before the arrival of Mr. Reily.
For publication a copy of the resolution recently adopted by the "Yes-ddle and Motor Club" by virtue of which the Governor was made an honorary member of the said organization. The said document which was signed by the President of the Club E. B. .yVilctx and Messrs. P. PaskjLawrence F. Coon, Asabel CToll and J. E. Heinzman, contained such very serious accusations that it seemed to us "natural to consult with the Attorney General. "It was natural to consult with the Attorney General, who was of the opinion that the said resolution constituted a libel and that he would now criminally prosecute its authors. The resolution in its first part, arguing the honorable appointment of the Governor, expresses itself in a thoughtless manner against the previous administration in Puerto Rico and launches terrible accusations against the Administration of justice in the island and against the Island Police Force. The Attorney General, Mr. Mestre, informed us that he would request an official copy of the aforementioned resolution from the Governor in order to pursue its authors. CONFERRING WITH THE GOVERNOR. Yesterday, Mr. Benedicto, Mr. Santoni and the current president of the Unionist Party, Mr. Pepe Torres, were conferring with the Governor. The interview held by the two political leaders with the head of the Executive was extremely cordial, and we understand that between the party and the Governor has begun a stage of harmony that is on the way to a frank and sincere understanding. Mr. Torres, before accepting the interim presidency of the party, exchanged impressions with the Governor and told him that he would not accept that position unless he promised him that he would be in a position to maintain friendly relations with him. The Governor, we were informed, who thinks highly of Mr. Torres, offered him his friendship, and up to this date the relations between them are cordial. THE APPOINTMENTS OF DEPARTMENTAL JE- . WE CAN ALMOST BE SURE THAT WITHIN A FEW WEEKS THE APPOINTMENTS OF DEPARTMENTAL HEADS WILL BE MADE. We can almost assure you that within a few weeks the appointments of department heads, whose terms expire this month, will be made. We have news that
in the selection of the new chiefs the Governor" will not heed the recommendations of any committee, and that the appointments he will make will be a source of satisfaction to the whole country. VIBBEY Sends Large Masses of Rebels to Defeat British Troops - VIBBEY Sends Large Reinforcements to subdue the Rebellion from Calcutta - Internattofcai News Service LONDON, August 24.-A dispatch received today from Bombay, by the Exchange Telegraph, reports that the seriousness of the Indian riots in the Malabar district has considerably increased, and that reinforcements of British and natural troops have been hurriedly dispatched from Bangalore to subdue the disturbance of order. Disorderly crowds are swarming in possession of several towns and villages, according to reports received. In the Calcutta region, three thousand masters destroyed several villages after committing innumerable acts of plunder, many people were killed in armed clashes with the rebels. A message from Calcutta to the "Dai ly Express" announces that thousands of Indians, armed to the teeth, having decisively defeated the British troops, dominate a good part of the Malabar district. A dispatch from the Central News Agency, transmitted from Bombay, reports that a powerful band of insurgents is marching on Feroke, ravaging everything in its path and growing stronger by the minute. The Malabar district lies on the southern part of the west coast of India and is washed by the Arabian Sea. The reports published by the press concerning the Indian uprising were confirmed by an official dispatch signed by the Earl of Beading, Viceroy of India, who states that sufficient troops have been dispatched to quell the insurrection, the importance of which has been confirmed. ""
A HUYKE CANDIDATE Although without having been able to confirm it yet, we advance íi news that we have been given that Mr. Huyke is working close to the governor pa Ta that the latter appoints Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, Dr. Jo sé L. Berrios, of Yabucoa. THE ACTIONS OF CORDOVA DAVILA ; El Ledo, Roberto H. Todd has received a letter from Washington informing him of the actions of Mr. Córdova Dávila in Washington. In the aforementioned letter he is told that Ledo. Córdova Dávila in the interview he had with President Harding and with the leaders of politics in the American metropolis, was limited to complaining about the way in which Governor Reily had presented the issues in Puerto Rico. His work seems, as implied in the letter, to have been confined to trying to get the Governor's attention, so that he would soften the procedure he had used in implementing his policy. A LETTER TO IGLESIAS Señor Iglesias was seen yesterday by our reporters leaving the Fortaleza, with a letter in his hands- Assuming of course that it was neither an appointment nor a dismissal, as the "Gallego" has "vara alta" with Mr. Reily, we questioned him as to! content efe-i" same. The letter was in reply to one addressed to the Governor, and in it Mr. Reily tells the leader that he will be glad to attend the Labor Day festival for a few moments, and that although he will not make a speech, he will say a few words to the workers. INVESTIGATION AGAINST A POLICEMAN Detective Benitez, after a timely investigation conducted through the Department of Justice in the Loiza street case in which the policeman Pietrnntoni was accused of wounding Pallo Segui in the thigh, has filed a complaint for harassment and assault against the policeman, who since that date has been suspended from employment and pay. According to reports, the evidence against the guard is overwhelming, so it is believed that he will be separated from the force.
GREAT SCHOOL SALE WE HAVE EVERYTHING AT UNPRECEDENTED PRICES FOR SCHOOLCHILDREN.
School Suits. Strong Shoes. School Notebooks. Cheap Underwear. School Umbrellas.
Fountain Pens. Thermos Lunch Boxes. Waterproof Caps. Special book bags. Gonzalez Paton Co., Inc. San Juan Ponci Mayaguez
Upper Socks. Cheap School Suits. School Caps and Hats Khaky Uniforms. School Pencil Boxes.
Over demand for raw sugar in the NM market.
Reflecting the sustained consumer nervousness on the part of buyers, from refiners to the ultimate consumer, and a certain degree of nervousness on the part of some producers, the immediate sugar market position developed a degree of uncertainty during the week. Raw sugars, other than Cuban, have experienced a reaction and while refiners have held their prices, some buyers have purchased more refined sugars than necessary for their immediate needs, having to resell at small concessions lower than the refiners' prices, giving the refined sugar market a variable tone and at the same time resulting in buyers postponing their purchases until absolute necessity forces them to enter the market. When in fact fundamental conditions have not changed and do not visibly indicate a renewed general depression, taking this into consideration, it appears that the reaction has been more psychological than otherwise and due to the apathetic attitude of the trade in general. Developments in the sugar market during the past year have been such that a majority of the trade hold their conservatism to such an extent that their confidence is easily undermined and they are ready to give consideration to any development of a less pessimistic nature than to a constructive one. As long as this timidity exists, market fluctuations, such as those experienced this week, are to be expected. The reaction experienced in the raw sugar market has been in sugars other than those from Cuba, such as those from Port Bico, Philippines and St. Croix, which arrived here without being sold, thus falling out of favor. Shippers expecting continued active demand contracted freight, with the sugars arriving or being en route at a time when the market was absorbing its large purchases of late July and early August and when the trade's power to finance additional purchases was being recharged. The Cuban Sugar Finance Commission has sustained its three and a quarter cent cost and freight price and when the trade renews its refining purchases, there is no indication that sugars, other than those from Cuba, will be sufficient to meet needs for much longer. The lull in demand for refined sugar and the resale by many interests who had obtained algae in advance of their needs has given the trade a better opportunity to absorb their purchases and also resulted in better distribution. Few of the trade have their needs for a long period and a renewal of orders is very likely to develop shortly, albeit on a hand-to-mouth basis. Cine Luna Today the intense drama 'La Ley del Fuerte' I Tomorrow: DEBUT of RAUL DEL ' MONTE and the drama "CUANDO LOS HOMBRES ENGAÑAN".
Atlantic Fruit Company MueUe No. 7 - North River, N. Y. Announces the Inauguration of its "Weekly Service" with the departure of the steamer "TANAMO" NEXT SEPTEMBER 22nd from NEW YORK to PUERTO RICO Contribute to the support of this new Line by ORDERING all your shipments by the ships of the same. VILLAR & COMPAÑIA Inc. GENERAL AGENTS: Tel. 347. P. O. Box 201. San Juan, P. R. Agents R. Cortada A Cía Suer, . < Ponce, * Hiram Gómez, Mayagüez. i ■ .1
A letter from the new Bishop of Pto. Rico, aIRdo. Father Torres.
Philadelphia, Pa., Aug. 24, 1921. Very Bev. Pbro. don .José Torres Díaz, Administrator, Diocese of Puerto Bico, San Juan, P. B.' My very dear Father: Surely you are already aware that the Holy See, looking with indulgence on my shortcomings, has seen fit to appoint me Bishop of Puerto Bico, as successor to the saintly Monsignor Jones, so well remembered by all of us who had the privilege of knowing him. It is almost certain that I will decide to go to Boma to receive the consecration and implore from the Holy Father a special blessing for the Diocese and for my humble person. Moreover, I wish to give my aged and saintly mother the consolation of my first and perhaps last episcopal blessing. I can assure you that I burn with the desire to be in that beloved Island, of which I have a very pleasant recollection because of its spirit of service and its clergy, and in whose inhabitants I was able to observe, in the brief days I spent there, unmistakable signs of love and veneration for our holy Mother the Church. I earnestly begged him to pray to God for me and to commend me to the fervent prayers of the Ven. Clergy, religious communities and faithful in general, for whom I pray in my turn, and to whom I wish the most exquisite blessings and graces of Heaven. With affectionate regards, I have the honor to repeat myself Your attentive servant in Christ, Jorge J. CABUANA. THE COMMERCE OF SAN JUAN WILL ORGANIZE AN INSURANCE COMPANY TO INSURE ITS OWN PROPERTY Because of the*últinious conditions offered by the insurance companies, which have been judged by the merchants of San Juan as arbitrary, they are now studying the way to organize an insurance company which, while guaranteeing their property by means of insurance contracts, will not grant privileges of any nature, by virtue of more or less onerous conditions. The aforesaid Company is to have a respectable fund, to be raised by shares among the merchants of this city and those of the island who request it, which will respond to the insured for the value of their goods in case of fire. The conditions, which, according to our reports, will be fixed by this Corporation, will be advantageous and comfortable for those who insure themselves, and annually, the Corporation will distribute the profits obtained among its associates. A meeting of the merchants will be called shortly to agree on the bases and the Regulations by which the aforementioned Company will be governed. THE MENDIA-PALES HUSBANDS We have had the pleasure of greeting the excellent gentleman and prominent businessman Mr. Manuel Mendía, managing partner of the reputable firm of "Sobrinos de Ezquiaga". Mr. Mendía returns to Puerto Bico after having made a trip to Europe and the United States, accompanied by his beautiful and distinguished wife. We are pleased to give our most affectionate welcome to your husband? Mendí a-Palés,