ELMUNDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One high, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau. RT Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345
DAILY MORNING JOURNAL,
t- X SEPTO LOS DOMINGOS
Publithwd and distributed under permit (No. 801) authorized byWie Art of October 6? '1917, on file at the Post Office of I San Juan, Porto Rico. By, order of the Preaident. A. 8. Bnr lesoit Postmaster General. Entered as second class matter. I febmarr 21. 191", at the Post Office at 8an_Juan r _Porto Ri (mind States o' America under the Act of march 8 1879 I
SATURDAY, JANUARY 8, 1920.
| NUMBER 583.
YEAR III
US NATIONS KEIINIKAN NEW HENTE IN SPAIN.
/ -( PQR CABLE FRENCH) / / . i / ' PARIS - In accordance with the recent decisions of the Assembly of Ginel "ra, the Secretary General of the League of Nations has summoned the members of the Committee of Communications to a conference to be held in Barcelona during the last days of February. The Assam ble* will be presided over by M. flanotaux and will be attended by all the members of the "League of Nations" as well as by the United States. WA8HINGT0 N, January The re-1 Wftáblece the "War Fi-. ntinCtrCM-pazation'' was adopted by the House p ior, 250 votes to 66. j The '"ná&ién approved the referred bill in spite of a veto by the President. -Preparations are being made for the installation of the new President. A bill has been introduced in Congress to vote the sum of $50,000 for the expenses occasioned by the inauguration. It is believed that this bill will meet with strong opposition in the Senate. -The Treasury Department reports that the public debt has di "mi "ned by $192,930,975 in the last quarter. I -The War Department : intends to establish major military centers in each of the nine military divisions. The ¡ : centers also include the ins L lalation of large barracks for approximately 20,000 men, I ari as well as land for ma , niobra" ¡ -Senator Buller, of Massachusetts, has introduced a resolution < by which he asks President Wilson ;1 to appoint a, representative to li ' International Weapons Conference- 1 amounts. WASHINGTON-an important conference to discuss the Cuban situation has been held at the White House, attended by President Wilson, the Assistant Secretary of State and Cuban Minister Manuel Cespedes. The President stated that the United States had no intention of intervening militarily in Cuba and that General Crowder's visit simply meant that the United States viewed the Cuban situation with regret and that he, on behalf of the Government, would try to remedy it. MADRID-All the newspapers comment on the message from the Crown in enthusiastic terms. The King underlines the excellent relations that Spain maintains with other countries, and expresses the hope that in a short time the total pacification of the Mirroquin zone will be achieved. The Sovereign recommends that the social attacks should be pursued with a strong hand, and, finally, I alluded to the visit that Prince Don Fernando and the Spanish mission are making to America, a visit that will contribute to the strengthening of the ties of love and friendship with the Republics of America. We have just received a new assortment of leathers composed of black and colored Calfskins, Matte Cabretillas, colored Glacés, Black Boston and Oolor, leather <Je Toca of various gods, Badanas, Cabrétas, Charoles and others. ,. A PXZA BROTHERS 8. in O. | NOTICE i 'J; Rodriguez Vazquez < ¡ is pleased etr advise his cUon ¡ ¡ te" and friends, having moved "u ' [ ' office to the house number two le o ¡ the street of Christ, corner to fo- < " luán, where it is offered nnovnmon ¡ ¡ ¡ < toj| the orders of all. ► "♦♦♦éééodooeoooooooooogwFW"
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
HARDING WILL REDUCE THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES CWIIES.
EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE WORK IN HARMONY They report from Washington that Senator Harding will have formulated, as soon as he takes office, the foreign and domestic policy which he will submit to Congress for consideration. This is the view of leading Republicans who have taken part in past conferences and those now in progress. The practice of the new president -The practice of the new president," they say, "will be to consult frequently with Congress, to exchange views, and to learn the wishes of the people and the status of legislation. At present he is conferring on such legis- : lation as may be necessary and the probable reception by Congress of the recommendations he will make to them in his first message. I Several members of Congress have been invited to Marion this week. Sen. McCumber, the accidental chairman of the finance committee and studying the emergency tariff bill, were to have arrived at ■Marion yesterday to confer with Mr. Har|ding. I Among the members of the house fi¡gure F. W. Mondel, James W. Good, Dr. R. Anthony Jr., and P... II... Kelley, all of whom have been invited by cart% "While I have no desire to mix in the work you have in hand," said Harding, "I think it would be helpful if we compared notes and exchanged impressions. Moreover, I would like to enter into more intimacy with those who are directing the work in the house and senate, so that we may cooperate most cordially, keeping together the Republican faith with the country." "It is quite right," says Mondell, "that the legislative and executive branches should work in harmony. Neither can fulfill its duty completely without acting in unison with the other. I do not mean by this that the executive should dictate or impose any arbitrariness. If the Republican party can work in the two branches in unison, it will be a valuable service to the country. I think this should be possible, and I hope to see great things come out of Mr. Harding's determination to have consultations during his administration." Senator Hardiñg is known to want to know what party leaders want on the question of reviving the WAR FINANCE CORPORATION and the implementation of an emergency tariff. Those who have talked to him have not been able to find out Harding's thoughts on the matter. If it is known he wants a big reduction in the number of civilian employees in the District of Columbia, which now stands at 93,000. MAJOR DISTRICT COURT LAWSUIT PUERTO RICO TREASURER DEMANDS RETURN OF $134,000 The District Court will probably hear next Monday in Section 2 of the District Court the exceptions filed by the Attorney General against the lawsuit filed by the Ledos. J. J. Ortiz Alibran and R. Martinez Alvarez, on behalf of "Alonso Riera y Co." and some two hundred signatures, against the Treasurer of P. R. demanding the return of the amounts paid by the plaintiffs in guarantee stamps in accordance with a law of 1917. It is alleged in the suit that the said tobacco guaranty stamp law was declared unconstitutional by the Boston Circuit Court, and that, therefore, all who paid such tax are entitled to a refund. The Attorney General, represented by legal officer Ledo Angel Arroyo Rivera, alleges that the Court lacks jurisdiction; that the statute of limitations has expired; that there is improper joinder of plaintiffs; and that there is no allegation of facts sufficient to state a cause of action because the plaintiffs did not pay under protest, but voluntarily. Some $34,000 is claimed and the tribunals will have to decide whether or not it was necessary to pay such contribution under protest, even though the law was null and void.
ANSWERING AN EDITOR OF "EL MUNDO" . Being the candidate "so unanimously designated by the Unionist majorities for President of the House of Representatives, the opinions of Dr. Cayetano Coll Cuchí, undoubtedly, have transcendental importance in the throbbing issues that are presented to the country at the present time. We visited the young and eloquent tribune yesterday in his judicial offices. After going through several departments whose walls are materially crammed with books, so that we have no hesitation in assuring that Mr. Coll Cuchi has the best and most numerous library on the island, we were introduced into the private office of the remarkable lawyer, whose merits are known to all the world. We looked at the papers: notarial deeds, bank balances, minutes of corporations and an endless number of documents. Then we picked up at random several books: "A Critical History of Greek Philosophy", "Marxisme contre Solialisme", "Instituciones políticas y'júdiciales", works in English, Spanish, French, philosophy, sociology, politics and law. - He received us with his joviality at the Lumbre. Don Cayetano looks like a student. We indicated our purpose, 1 and he immediately rang a bell; a stenographer came in ..... -Georges Carpentier The popular pugilist Georges Carpen, tier that lately defeated Lavins Ky in the United States will be presented in Puerto Rico in the grandiose cinematographic production in seven parts titled "THE MAN-PRODIGY". Of inordinate luxury and of a fine and interesting plot, this production will undoubtedly have a splendid acclaim in all theaters where it is shown. Among the play's exciting scenes is a boxing challenge lasting more than six rounds. We invite the sympathizers of the great representative of the Latin world to admire this colossal production, assuring them that they will be highly satisfied with it. See its premiere at the Rialto on Wednesday, January 19. Advt. plisses and lines buttons. A CARAZO, Brau St 72. Advt.
IR--"I*." ■■ - cer to the friend- I said to us. And we began - our interrogation: ¡ 'Editor: -As a lawyer and from the very extensive knowledge you have 1 on Jurisprudence, and, if I am not mistaken, one of the authors of the new Electoral Law, in spite of your many con pations, could you give us your opinion and tell us if the interpretation that has been given so far to the mentioned law with respect to the irremovability of municipal officials has fvn. The question has been answered briefly and clearly by Salvador Mestre in the official opinion published by the newspapers one or two days ago. The attitude of the Republican party is ridiculous; and 'demonstrates the incapacity of its directors to be in front of a serious and responsible ■ government. . - The Porto Rican and American Insurance Go. General Meeting of Shareholders. I At three o'clock in the afternoon of Tue. [tes day of January 11 of next year, 1921, and at the offices of ¡the Corporation, calle del Comer/ [ció 1 y 3, San Juan, P. R., the General OrJ ¡diñaría Meeting of Shareholders of The Porto Rican and American Insurance Co. will be held, in compliance with the provisions of Article 11 of the Bylaws of said Corporation. < - Which is hereby made public for the knowledge of the interested parties. San Juan, P. R., December 15, 1920. For the Board of Directors, Manuel I. Saldaña. Secretary. I paintsI ■ 8 VILLAMIL - T I See our advertisement X on the S second page. |
Miss Carolyn Plattner, recognized as the me player ce bill:res, quo will leave for South America to play with the professionals of this continent.
The Unionists will enter the Casa muni cipal in their own time and hpra,- says Coll y Cuchí IN NORTH AMERICA A RAN CURRENT IN FAVOR OF ' JE PUERTO RICO ASPIRATIONS IS BEGINNING .... - - - "
H. - ....... .... y In addition to the legal question, there is in this matter an important political question, from the moral point of view, which the country should study carefully i The men who lead the Republican party invented the name "Tropical Republic" to designate the ideal of the Union men, assuring that if Puerto Rico should ever become a sovereign state, the Unionists, once in possession of the Government, would impose their tyranny, refusing to obey the laws and the vote of the majorities. Indeed, there are elections still under the American flag, and the people of San Juan legally give their suffrages to the party that until then was in the opposition, and the Republicans, owners of the municipal government, refuse to obey the will of the electorate and pretend to conserve, against all odds, their destinies in the Municipality. I think it is very difficult that after what has happened we can continue to be accused of being the men of the "Tropical Republic." The Unionist Central Board has wisely ordered that the matter be turned over to the District Attorneys and the Department of Justice. They will enforce the law, and the Unionists will enter the San Juan Municipal House at the proper time and hour, after having defeated their adversaries in the elections and in the courts: and also before the Supreme Court of public morality. I However, if I were in charge of directing this fight, I would look for a way to (Continued on p. 2) ¡"His Majesty the Money'* í This very interesting and highly dramatic novel by the distinguished author Xavier de Montepin filmed with all the details and great artistic relief. This very interesting and highly dramatic novel by the famous author Xavier Montepin, filmed in great detail and great artistic relief by the eximia dra mática actress, glory of the French theater Fabienne Fabregues will premiere in Puerto Rico in the well-known and accredited theater I "RIALTO" ' Exhibiting during the days: Tuesday - 1L Wednesday 12, and Thursday January 13. The three days in which this ¡ beautiful cinematographic production is divided, whose titles are: í la.-LAS DOS HERMANAS i 2a-LO QUE PUEDE EL DINERO ¡ 3a-LA INCOGNITA DE LA t Don't forget to ask for your subscription. Advt.
RA DE BILLAR
THE BEST GAME
BLOODY EVENT OCCURRED IN A = BO. OF BAYAMON
On the night of the day of Beyes occurred in the neighborhood of Juan Sanchez, Bayamon, a bloody event that filled the peaceful residents of that place with consternation. I In the house of José Rosario' celebrated, base a joyful dance on the occasion of the traditional festivity, being one of ■ the concurring José Atanasfe, father - of numerous family and only breadwinner of the same one. When they were at their happiest, Agus j tin Huertas arrived at the door of the ca§a, and it seems that he was out of his normal state, perhaps because he had taken some spi- ¡ rituous drink. Huertas's action did not seem to please Atanasio, who immediately called the attention of the disturbing 1$ reigning joy. The words crossed, su. hiendo of color and meaning,! and from them passed and Huertas to the ma- f : nos. We were informed that Atanisio tried to avoid being assaulted by Huertas, but did not have time to avoid it, receiving a wound in the neck which caused his almost instantaneous death. The wounded man was taken to the Municipal Hospital, where he died a few minutes later, and the assailant was placed at the disposal of the authorities, who demanded a bond of one thousand dollars for his provisional liberty. ! We regret the event of the nature of the one that occupies our attention and we veto for the Prohibition to be implemented in the island with all the effectiveness that it wants, in order to avoid tragedies such as the one in the neighborhood of Juan Sanchez. \ Atanasio leaves in the greatest misery a large family, who will suffer the consequences of the selfishness of another. - THE CORRESPONDENT. .'IMPORTANT LAWSUIT IN THE ! FEDERAL COURT Yesterday, )a "Mercantile Bank of Ame ! rica Inc.", represented by Ledo. Molina St. Remy, filed suit against the "West P. R. Sugar Co. Inc.", Juan, Francisco and T-o sario Bianchi, who work under the firm of "Successors of Bianchi". The object of this suit is to recover $3000.00 from the defendants, and * further, to appoint a receiver to hear the matter. The complaint alleges that on May 24, 1919, the plaintiff and the defendants entered into a contract, the object of which was that the plaintiff firm would assign an amount to the defendants, and as security for the payment of said sum, the signature of 'Sues, de Bianchi was affixed to it. ' ' j Among other things, the contract provided, that the bank would open an account for $600,000, upon such terms and conditions as were qwed stimulated; that this amount on credit would be paid as follows: $200,000 to be delivered to the sugar company as soon as said company complied with the precepts of clause 12 of said contract, and the remainder of said sum to be paid at the rate of $60,000 per month, except the last monthly installment, which would be $40000; that said money was to be drawn by check on the plaintiff bank; that the sugar company was to pay 1 per cent on each note payable 90 days and that it was to consign and ship in the name of the bank all sugar produced on the property of the defendants, and in addition, that it was to consign and ship in the name of the bank all sugar produced on the property of the defendants, and in addition, that the bank was to pay 1 per cent on each note payable 90 days after the expiration of said contract, and that it was to consign and ship in the name of the bank all sugar produced on the property of the defendants. The plaintiff further contends that the bank should retain the sum of $6 for each sack shipped by the defendants and that the remainder of such sacks should be deposited in the name of the plaintiffs, who were entitled to draw on this sum. The plaintiff further denies that the defendants have in any way failed to comply with the terms of the contract between the two parties, and therefore asks the Court to order the defendants to pay the plaintiffs the costs and interest of the transactions, which, according to them, amount to $3000. BASE BALL i ! Tomorrow at ten o'clock the teams "San Juan" "Porto Rico" and "Porto Rico" will fight in the terreros of the stop 8, and for this reason there is great enthusiasm among the fans.
ITALY IS DETERMINED TO ESTABLISH THE 'VENDEHA,
(BY ENGLISH CABLE) NEW YORK -The monial cere, monial was held to commemorate the anniversary of Roosevelt's death. It was ¡ very solemn - Harry Boland, secretary to Edmond de Valera, the "leader" of Irish independence, declared that should England continue her campaign of assassination, his country would adopt the ' ' ' vendetta ' ' ' as in Sicily. MADRID-The Spanish Government extended the benefits of its health insurance to the citizens of the Spanish-American republics resident in Spain. The Hague-Queen Wilhelmina was operated on for a hernia. The Hague.-Augusta Victoria, ex.empress of Germany, who was ill at Doorn, was aggravated by the heart condition from which she had been suffering. ! NEWPOR-NEWS, Virginia - O'Callahan, Mayor of Cork (Ireland), who stowed away to avoid arrest by the English authorities, was allowed to disembark. He comes for the purpose of testifying before the "Co. mission of the Hundred' investigating the Irish problem DUBLIN, Ireland. -The secretary of Valera was arrested, disorders were recorded, of which some were wounded. CHILE- Don Antonio Vei-ragallo,' of the Treasury, died ROME-The Italian Government refused permission for the disembarkation of the delegate of the "soviets," who arrived for the purpose of attending the socialist conference to be held in that country. Cándido Auffan'j shot Juan Pauneto to death, e~. a cafetín The prosecutor sefialó two thousand dollars bail In the "Estrella" hacienda there were two fires, which destroyed two buildings ¡one of two floors; police investigate case Municipal department heads, ' medical corps and other employees have resigned Manuel Mócete PADILLA. TODAY GRAND GALA SATURDAY TODAY Premiere on Puerto Rico Anita Stewart in the extraordinary drama "n 7 acts of immense interest ' A Merced de la Vendetta o El Jockey del Amor Extraordinary Prices AMERICA THEATER Tonight two tandas. La Favorita NORMA TALMADGE in "LAW OF COMPENSATION" Afternoon Matinee-TWO TANDAS PRICES SUNDAY:-SUNDAY "LUCILA'S DIVORCE" í Comsdia in 5 Acts by Eddy Lyons AND Lee Moran -A World Rsvista AND the cpmedia "No Children Allowed" Morning Matinee at 10:30 Per la* Afternoon:'- Matinee TWO TANDAS oj , "BOUND AND GAGGED" and comic films at 5 and 10 cts. i"■MBKSaHMMWMV "OAKLAND" Automobiles We are pleased to advise that we have re. cibited the new model <'e OAKLAND 5 and 2-seater, 6-cylinder automobiles, for those who are interested. PIETKANT(>N1 & SOTO 1 (Oakland Departament.) t San Juaa, P. K.