ELWNDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. semester, 84.00 í One affo, 8.7.50
Offices) Bsfvstfor Brilla 83 < TsL 833 P, O. Box 345.
MORNING DAILY,
t-nbiianad "nd dutribuUd under permit (No/ 801) euthoSlied by th. Act ot October e, 1917, on fll. at th. Poet Ofice of San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of th. Preeident, A. B. Bur leson, Poetmaater G "uk "1. Entered aa aecond claaa matter, febmarv 21. 1 "H>- at th. P "at Ofile. at Ban Juan. Perth KI co. United aw of America under th. Act of march ". U "*"
EXCEPT ON SUNDAYS
ARO III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
SATURDAY, AUGUST 27, 1921.
NUMBER 779.
No work without the authorization of the Dept. of Labor.
Mr. Lebron, of the Labor Bureau, informed us yesterday that since the date on which the law of the Legislature" to regulate the employment of minors was to come into force was near, he thought it appropriate to state that as from the date on which that law comes into force no minor child shall be employed, nor shall he be permitted or tolerated to work in any gainful occupation or in connection therewith, with the exception of domestic work and work on farms and gardens as provided in Section 21 of the Act, for more than six consecutive days in a single week, nor more than forty-eight hours in a week, nor more than eight hours in a single day, nor before eight o'clock in the morning or after six o'clock in the evening of any day. Every employer shall post and keep posted in a conspicuous place wherever any child is employed, or is permitted or tolerated to work, a printed notice stating the maximum number of hours such child shall be required or permitted to work each day of the week, the hours of beginning and ending work each day, and the hours at which the period allowed for meals begins and ends. The form for said notice shall be furnished by the head of the Bureau of Labor, and the presence of the said child at the place where he works, for longer on any day than the time so expressed, or at any hour not expressed in said printed notice, shall be considered as PRIMA FACIE evidence of a violation of the provisions of the law. WHEN YOU WILL BE ALLOWED TO WORK ' ' ' ' ' ' ' i Mr. Lebron further informed us that the head of the Bureau of Labor, or any person duly authorized by him, is hereby authorized by him to work. Mr. Lebron further informed us that the head of the Bureau of Labor, or any person duly authorized by him, is hereby authorized to issue permits to work during vacations to any child from fourteen to sixteen years of age, which permit him to work during the regular summer vacation granted in the public schools, provided that the age of such child has been ascertained in accordance with Section 11 of the Act, and that the child has in all other respects complied with the requirements for the issuance of a permit to work as specified in the Act. These permits shall be of a different color from the school year work permits prescribed by the Act, and shall be valid only during the official summer vacation granted in public schools.
The autonomists displeased by the acts of the Central Board TRY TO ACT SEPARATELY
Yesterday morning at ten o'clock he took office, as far as the administrative part of it is concerned, Ledo. Leopoldo Santia go Carmona, recently appointed as our readers know, to the position of president of the Workers' Compensation Commission. In the afternoon, at the meeting of the aforementioned commission, Mr. José Coll y Vidal, who up to that time had acted as president of the same, informed the commission of the communications sent by the secretary of the Executive, Mr. Siaca Pacheco, revoking the appointment of Mr. Marrero and making it in favor of Mr. Carmona. Afterwards, Mr. Joaquín Becerril took the floor, who welcomed the new president, and expressed his best wishes that in the performance of his duties he would obtain the greatest success. Mr. Carmona replied to these words, thanking them. Messrs. Rivera Mar tínez, Villaronga and Coll Vidal remained silent in the meantime. Mr. Becerril then asked for a vote of thanks to Mr. Coll y Vidal for the good job he had done in managing the commission during the time he was president of the same, and Mr. Rivera Martínez, seconding this proposal of Mr. Becerril, asked that the same vote of thanks be extended to Mr. Montaner, for the good job he had done in managing the offices and the administrative part of the aforementioned organization. Mr. Coll y Vidal, then, said brief words thanking the vote of thanks, and stated that with respect to the new appointment he had nothing to say, since he had gone there to fulfill his duty, and that it was his intention to continue doing the same. PROBABLE EXCOMUNION OF MR. CARMONA According to the opinion of prestigious personalities of the Unionist Party, it is believed that at the next meeting of the Central Board the attitude of Mr. Carmoña will be considered, who as a Unionist has passed over an agreement of said organization, which was ratified by the last Assembly of the collectivity. The prevailing opinion is that Mr. Carmona will be expelled from the bosom of the party, and that to this effect, Article 19 of the Rules of Procedure will be applied to him.
The 4th paragraph of which states that those "who rebel against the political agreements of the party's leadership, or make statements tending to the political discredit of the organizations that constitute it" will be expelled from the party. HUYKE Ledo Huyke, in relation to what we published in yesterday's edition about the telephone conversation he had with Ledo. Girmona, told one of our editors that this information was wrong and that what he stated to Mr. Carmona was the Governor's wish to meet him and his (Mr. Huyke's) desire to introduce him to the Governor. That this is an invention of the one reported by the reporter of EL MUNDO. We are happy to publish this clarification since he is such a good friend of ours as Mr. Huyke is; but we wish to state for the record that our Editor affirms that he is not mistaken, and this is proven by the coincidence that after the Governor's wish to meet Mr. Girmona and Mr. Huyke's wish to present him to the Governor was satisfied, the appointment of Mr. Carmona took place. THE JUDGE OF THE PEACE OF TRUJILLO ALTO Yesterday the Governor signed the appointment of José Hernández Gutiérrez as Justice of the Peace of Trujillo Alto. This appointment was recommended, as we were informed, by the "attorney general", Mr. Mestre. THE VICE PRESIDENCY OF THE UNION Due to the resignation of Mr. Giorgetti, which will be considered from one moment to the next, Mr. Genaro Cautiño, from Guayama, sounded like a candidate. At the last minute we have learned that Mr. Cautiño is not willing to accept the position even if he were to be appointed to it. If Mr. Cautiño does not accept, it is believed that none of the members of the current Central Board will be appointed, in order to avoid rivalries and selfishness in these times when cohesion and solidarity are more necessary than ever, and it is believed that an outside candidate will be brought in, which will be Don Vicente Usera, from Ponce, or Ledo. José G. Torres. THE GOVERNOR VISITS CABRAS ISLAND Having learned that the Governor had yesterday made a vi (Ooutinúa ex p. 3a.)
Atlantic Fruit Company With departures from Pier No. 7, NORTH RIVER, NEW YORK Through its GENERAL AGENTS for PUERTO RICO VILLAR & COMPAÑIA Inc. ANNOUNCES THE INAUGURATION OF A WEEKLY CARGO AND PASSENGER SERVICE between the port of New York and the ports of San Juan, Ponce and Mayagüez, beginning next September, with specially built REFRIGERATING STEAMERS for the TRANSPORTATION of FRUITS, WIDE FRUIT CARRIERS FOR FIRST-CLASS PASSENGER Telephone 347. SAN JUAN. P. O. Box 201. AGENTS on the ISLAND R. Cortada & Cia Sucr., Playa, Ponce. Hiram Gómez, Playa, Mayagüez.
TO OUR CLIENTS We hereby have the pleasure to announce to our clients that we have moved our offices from 77 Alien St., altos, to 8 Arcenal St., building of Messrs. P. Gonzalez & Co. LAMBORN & COMPANY
England will maintain a navy equal to the most powerful THE ANCLO JAPANESE PACT EXISTS AON
International News Service LONDON, Aug. 18.-The British Empire will maintain a navy equal to that of any other great power in the world, Prime Minister Lloyd George declared at noon today at the Commons. This statement was made in the course of the debate on the results of the British imperial conference. It was agreed," said the Prime Minister, "that the British Empire should have a navy equal to that of any other great power in the world. In the future, the British Dominions will contribute to the organization of that navy." The above statement was received with great applause. Referring to the forthcoming Washington conference on disarmament and Far Eastern problems, the Prime Minister declared: "The British Empire should behave like a gentleman and attend with a spirit of fraternity towards the United States. If the United States and Japan could come to an agreement on their Pacific problems, it would be a great event in securing the peace of the world. The surest means of ensuring the success of the disarmament conference lies in an intelligence on the Pacific questions. I am hopeful that such intelligence will be arrived at at the forthcoming Washington conference. The prime minister then defended the extension of the Anglo-Japanese alliance in the following terms: "It is unanimously recognized that the 'Anglo-Japanese' alliance was faithfully and loyally maintained by Japan during the war." He was interrupted by applause and then went on to say: "It is suggested that Great Britain should use ACIDS, the threat of chemical fertilizers loaded with NITROGENATED SUBSTANCES and the excellent goodness of pulverized "limestone rock" (carbonate of lime) to rid the plant of disease and restore the soil to its productive potential. If Professor Keith says so now, perhaps his words will be heeded more, will be "less discussed" and we will FINALLY enter into the real canid of obtaining positive results in our agricultural activities. God willing! Thank you, Mr. Director, for the publication of this letter and I remain your attentive friend and H.H., R. DEL VALLE ZENO, Civil Engineer and Agronomist.
I now turn to Japan and say: "Thank you for the part that 03 played, but we do not want to be with you any longer". From various parts of the chamber burst forth cries of "No!" The prime minister declared that the United States and the British Empire were in agreement on I03 general principles of world policy. "This-he concluded-should be the basis: of an absolute guarantee of peace. The world is still hopeful that in Washington such intelligence will be arrived at." THE EFFECT IN WASHINGTON WASHINGTON, Aug. 18.-The statement made today in the House of Commons by Prime Minister Lloyd George that Great Britain intends to maintain a navy equal to that of any other nation, produced in the Senate criticism from those who have forced the reduction of the United States naval program. "Lloyd George's statement does not surprise me - said Repubii cano Senator Poindexter, chairman of the Senate Naval Affairs Committee. His statement is but further evidence of the folly and short-sightedness of those who forced the reduction of naval expenditures in the United States and the virtual suspension of naval construction essential to the adequate protection of the American people in any future emergency that may arise." A HUGE ALAMBIQUE APPEARS IN HATILLO (By telegraph) EL MUNDO, San Juan. Guardsmen Ambrosio López, Felipe B. Rivera and Ramón Torres, under the command of Julio M. Izquierdo, captured a huge copper still, house of the rich owner Eugenio Rodríguez, in the "Eayaney" neighborhood of Hatillo. A quartola of rum was taken. THE CORRESPONDENT. GREAT PREPARATIONS ARE MADE TO RECEIVE GENERAL MANGIN SANTIAGO DE CHILE, August 26. -Great preparations are being made to receive General Mangin, who is traveling on board the French warship "Michelet". NEEDED: a telephonist, with some knowledge of English. For inquiries, please contact the "Palace Hotel" office. San Juan P. R., August 26, 1921. Advt.
LOOK WELL AT THE BRAND DO NOT FORGET THE PRICE Quality jg J 5 QQ I | $15.00 7 is the prime- I------ styles nuero, without 0 tie- paFd R S men of ne brand no -u.". omc" j ¡ "cgistewco u.s. crnct . > " I THE GENUINE CLOTH tod ° 3 103 Jo compre, "tro. bY-OOQdau.woqsted co. | ,.,,,_^ TPr , ro bodies A UNMARKED SUIT IS A DOCUMENT WITHOUT A SIGNATURE 7T | GONZALEZ PADIN CO. SAN JUAN. PONCE. MAYAGÜEZ.
Theater "America" Tonight great success Debut of the Spanish artists "LOS V1VESKIS" and the canzonetista and dancer " LINDA SOFIA" They will premiere their beautiful set, also wearing rich jewelry and beautiful costumes made in Paris, latest fashions. In addition the premiere of the German drama in 6 acts "EL CAMALEON" Tomorrow reappearance of "LOS VIVES .K£S" and the drama "EL VERDUGO". GREAT SUCCESS 35 and 25 cents LUNETA.
To our friends and clients > ---- Due to the death in New York of General José Manuel Hernández, father of our partner Don Nicolás, our offices will remain closed for three days, as a sign of mourning. NICOLAS HERNANDEZ & CO. San Juan, P. R-, August 26, 1921. LCDO. DEL TORO FERNANDEZ After spending a short time among us, in the company of his beautiful daughters Selinia, Marina and Pepiña, our good friend Ledo del Toro Fernández left for his residence in Yauco. C. del Toro Fernandez, to whom we send our enthusiastic farewell greeting.
The grandiose Super production Delirio Festival in seven parts Jack Holt, Lila Lee, Louis .Wilson Tomorrow Sunday:-Grandiose photodrama 'El Turno de la Vida' in five acts by BESSIE BARRISCALE.
Sensational&s manifestations of a man of science.
LETTER DBL ENGINEER 9- DEL VALLE ZENO San Juan, P. B.. August 26, 1921. Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, San Juan. L Dear friend: Allow me a space in your enlightened newspaper, not to deal with "political matters'', a subject almost exclusive today of our filary press, but for a matter of "scientific order'' in which is involved the future of our agriculture and therefore the basis of our economic future. I have before me the issue of "The World" of New York of August fourteenth, nineteen hundred and twenty-one, which carries in an extensive article (three columns) the sensational statements of Professor Frank M. Keith of Medford, Mass., a recognized authority on agricultural matters, his portrait and photograph of some of his experiments with manures. After tnjphos years of labor, Professor Keith reaches, among other things, the following conclusions which he now makes public: "That he does not participate in the opinion, almost universal among farmers, students of agricultural colleges and scientists that manures or chemical fertilizers can be used with certain success in the production of crops from the soil. That on the contrary, he maintains that these chemical manures or fertilizers end up by EMPOWERING THE SOIL, causing the crops to be of inferior quality in the long run, the main cause of this being the excess of ACIDS and NITROGENATED SUBS TANGIES'' He goes on to say: "A soil fertilized exclusively with exanic substances in excess and with CHEMICAL FERTILIZERS loaded with NITROGENATED COMPOUNDS will produce plants of sickly appearance, of unnatural coloration and with tendencies to decay and die prematurely''. Professor Keith goes on to state: "That the apparently MYSTERIOUS disease in potatoes and other vegetables, such as GRAMINS, fruits, etc., is simply produced by a diet OVERLOADED with NITROGEN and that MINERAL FERTILIZERS produce vigorous plants". And he concludes by saying after all these considerations, that with "pul-, verized rock'' he has succeeded in increasing his corachas in quantity and quality from one hundred to two hundred per cent." You know that all this which Professor Keith now expresses was the subject of my public lecture two years ago in San Juan and of my pamphlet on the subject of the "shading" disease of sugar cane (grass). There I argued the danger of the SOILS.
Ireland is still studying David Lloyd George's proposals.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) DUBLIN, August 26.-In an official communiqué it is announced that Ireland continues to discuss the proposals of Lloyd George. The fact that Bishop Obheim was the one who forwarded the message from Eamonn de Valera has caused a great sensation. The message is believed to have been inspired by Cardinal Logue and the Clergy, which will prevent the renewal of hostilities between the Irish Republic and the army of the Crown. FURIOUS FIGHTS NEAR MELILLA MELILLA, August 26 Bloody fighting between Spanish and Moroccan forces. The attack on the convoys has intensified. CAMBO ACCEPTS THE POST OF MINISTER OF FINANCE MADRID, August 26.-Mr. Cambó has finally accepted the post of Minister of Finance in the government headed by Maura. LONDON HAS AROUND 7 MILLION AND A HALF MILLION INHABITANTS t LONDON, August 26.-The population of Great Britain, not including Ireland, is 42,767,530, as against 40,831,396 in 1911. According to the same census, Loa dres has 7,476,430 inhabitants. TURKS BOMBING, AIRPLANES OF THE ENGLISH ARMY LONDON, August 26.-Dispatches from Constantinople. announces that an English airplane was bombed and taken prisoner by the Turks, who allege that the said airplane was not watching the Greek fields to report to the Athenians. The Turks refuse to release the British, on the grounds that the latter are helping King Constantine's troops. Cinema Moon The powerful drama by Bert Lytell THE EYES OF THE BLIND Tomorrow Sunday: REGIA FUNCTION. DEBUT of the Compañía-Bufa-Cubana DIAZ MATHEU, composed of 10 artists, with the topical play "YO QUIERO SER SENADOR" Eye on prices, 30 c. lunette. It is pleated and buttons are lined. A CARAZO, Brau Sí. 72. A4rt. -
LINE "PINILLOS" Steamer "Conde Wifredo" Will arrive at San Juan from Spain about September 8 and will be dispatched for Santiago de Cuba and Havana as soon as she completes her operations. VAPOR "BARCELONA" is loading at Barcelona from where she will depart on September 5, calling at Malaga and Cadiz. She is expected in San Juan around September 25 and will sail for Santiago de Cuba and Havana at the end of her operations. For fares and cargo, SOBRINOS DE IZQUIERDO & CO. SAN JUAN. CEMENT Any Quantity. Immediate Delivery Phone 1131. COLL & CO. 63 Allen St.