THE WORLD
■" 1 b-- - pages 3 etvs" Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
, h Offices: H Salvador Brau, 81 '♦ Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ARO III
SAN JUAN. PUERTO RICO
and distributed undo perait (Ko. 801) artbonW by th. Aet of oetobar é, 1817, onfila rt the Port Office of tu" Porto Rico. By ordee of the Preeident, A. 8. *** le "on, Poatmaeter General. Sintered aa eecond elaaa Mrttec, feb Mary 21 101# rt the Port Office af 8aa Juan. Porto co. United States of America the Act of march #. 187"
SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 1921.
NUMBER 796.
Mr. Rally and the transfer of the lepers from Cabras Island.
Governor Belly's private secretary informed a Bedactor of ours that the Governor has reiterated his intention to take the necessary steps as soon as possible to transfer the lepers of Cabras Island to a better and more suitable place, as he announced after visiting them some time ago. The Governor is hopeful that the financial affairs of the government, hitherto considered an obstacle, will be arranged in such a way as to enable action to be taken in this direction as soon as possible. POLITICAL COMMISSION FROM COBOZAL Yesterday afternoon was in San Juan and we had the pleasure of greeting it, a commission of Unionists from Corozal, who came for the purpose of working out the appointment of Justice of the Peace of that municipality in favor of one of the members of a terna which was sent by the party and not in favor of Casiano Mediavilla, who it was said would be appointed. £a Ibmission visited Mr. Huyke, as it appears that the commission had been informed that the said other candidate had been recommended to the Governor by Mr. Huyke. Last night we spoke by telephone with Mr. Huyke and he told us that he had not made any recommendation, that the commission went to visit him and that he, in his desire to help the party, would confer with Don Pepe Torres so that he could make the recommendation he thought appropriate. THE GOVERNOR'S LETTER AND THE CENTRAL BOARD Throughout yesterday afternoon, the subject of all the conversations was the letter that the Governor addressed to IT Don José G. TÍfres and whose dispatch we announced in our previous edition. The letter, as we said yesterday, is limited to congratulating Don Pepe for the vote of confidence conferred on him by the Board, and with respect to his political statements, he says, as far as we have been informed, that the one he has always referred to is the anti-Aypericans. The letter and the reply from Ledo. Torres were to be submitted last night to the consideration of the Central Board, and moments before the meeting of the Unionist Board there was immense public speculation as to the effect that the much commented letter to the current president of the party might have on its members. - DANCES IN CAPE BOJO On the occasion of the festivities to be held in honor of the patron saint of Cape Bojo, St. Michael the Archangel, the "Casino Catorro jefio" will give three dances of confidence, on the 18th, 21st and 25th of the present; a dance for children, on the 25th, and another for society, on the 29th. eAVISO We are pleased to inform our relations that we have received materials for the manufacture of chemical fertilizers by the steamer "Santurce" and we are in a position to serve immediately any order that may be placed with us. SANTINI FERTILIZER 00.
Freedom (te Pto. Rico defended by an American.
(Translated from the "New York Times' ') The edition of the "New York Times," August 18, carries a cablegram from the "Associated Press" which contains statements made by the new governor of Puerto Rico, Mr. Belly, that he will not place in any public office persons who favor the independence of his fatherland. There is undoubtedly a grave error in this statement; it cannot be that the specter of George III is walking the waters of the Caribbean Sea! Since I am a great friend of the Puerto Ricans and am familiar with the hopes and fears of the islanders, it is my duty to come to their defense and protest strongly against such statements, which constitute for the people I love a cruel mistreatment of the human rights of the little Spanish-speaking country. Never have the American people paid deep attention to the conditions existing in the Island, and for this reason they have not had the opportunity to know its noble and fundamental principles. If we were to remember with pride what compelled us to defend Cuba and fight for its independence, and the Philippines and Puerto Bico to liberate them from Spanish misrule, we would not be apt to forget other and more important things. At first glance, it is possible that the people of the United States may believe that by the mere fact of offering statehood to a country, it means that it should clap its hands for the honor conferred, although I believe that on the face of it it is an honor, but against this example, we have the proof Canada, our neighbor, which resembles us, batjjg. What happened to Mr. Taft's project of reciprocity with Canada when Mr. Champ Clark suggested that the said project was but the beginning of an annexation? Canada immediately refused, and did not even say thank you. Now, to Port Bico, which is a small island lost in a great sea, we do not say: "Noble island, we invite you to join our confederation. We understand that your language, your customs and temperament are different from ours; but, nevertheless, we will seek a new form of government under which the children of Borinquen can live a life completely independent of their own development, and be, nevertheless, a member of our great family." Oh, no! Instead, we say to the helpless little island; 'You will be a state of the American Union, whether you want to be or not. To be a state, you have to give up your language-the mother tongue-the only form of expression Puerto Ricans have for crying and for smiling. Simply put, this means that in order for Puerto Ricans to be a state of the Union, they have to lose their soul." When Puerto Ricans talk about independence, it is simply because they have been told that the only alternative to achieve statehood is Se plisa y forran botones. A CARAZO, Brau St 72. - Advt
i Atlantic Fruit Company Pier No. 7 - North River, N. Y. Announces the Inauguration of its "Weekly Service" with the departure of the steamer "TANAMO" ON SEPTEMBER 22nd from NEW YORK to PUERTO RICO Contribute to the support of this new Line by ORDERING all your shipments by the vessels of the same. I VILLAR & COMPAÑIA Inc. * GENERAL AGENTS: : Tel. 347. P.O. Box 201. San Juan, P. R. Agents R. Cortada & Cía Sucr. Hiram Gómez, Mayagüez.
Customs received notice of alleged syndicate.
We have reports that a bulletin has been received at the Adua na from the chief of Customs in New York, in which he says, among other things, that a gasoline yacht named "Siesta," with a crew of six men, and which is believed to belong to Mr. W. F. McCoy, often sails through American waters, infecting the ports where it touches with alcoholic beverages of all kinds. This yacht, 7-asserts the aforesaid information,--is in contact with or belongs to a syndicate of smuggling vessels, which are continually introducing liquors into American ports. It is reliably reported that he has lately landed a considerable quantity of beverages in the United States, which he took at the port of Nassau. The object of this notice from the New York Customs to that here, is that in case the ' * * Siesta ' ' is surprised in American waters, explanations may be asked of the Captain and his crew, in regard to his suspicious movements since the beginning of the year. A friend of ours to whom we told the above, told us that a few nights ago he had seen a suspicious vessel off San Cristobal, which, if it were not the famous submarine that Pesquera was expecting, would probably be the smuggler's vessel. DON FERNANDO VALLECILLO This esteemed friend, one of the owners of the "Luna" movie theater, has left for Los Baños de Coamo, together with his distinguished wife and children, where he will spend a long time. Graba permanence wishes them this fall and that the absence is not prolonged too much. x "CAIGA QUIEN QUEGA CAIGA Y CUESTE LO QUE CUESTE" (POB TELEGRAPH) Caguas, September 16. The Bestick girl affair has raised great comments, with twisted inter prefaces. I propose, much to my regret, to present it amply before the Governor, clarifying everything, saving reputations and presenting the real culprits. I will not tolerate injustice to prevail, whoever falls, and whatever the cost. If the scandal has come to the surface, only those who brought the matter to the press for the first time are responsible, since justice should have proceeded to investigate without comment. All this is on record in sentences and court "records". V. Rodriguez ORTIZ. THE COFFEE HARVEST X MINOR FRUITS, DESTROYED They communicate from Utuado that, as a result of the storm, the losses of coffee and minor fruits are estimated at 25 percent. of losing their language. They have never been ungrateful, never. Let them keep their language. And if we cannot grant them a kind of freedom-a freedom that is as real to them as ours-a freedom that is not different from ours; if under our Stars and Stripes this kind of freedom is impossible, then it will be as convenient for us as for Puerto Rico to give them absolute independence. But I believe an arrangement possible. t W. Alien LUEY. TO THE PUBLIC In view of the complaints we daily see and hear i*related to the price of bread in San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, Santurce and Rio Piedras we make known to the public that the bread made in our bakeries is sold wholesale to the delivery boys at the price of nine cents a full pound, and to the tall, in our stalls and mos. tr&doreg of bakeries at the price of ten cents. The SanMuan Bakery, Inc.
which is a
an arrangement.
The humiliating debacle at Barruecos
OF AN ARMY OF 24,085 SOLDIERS ONLY' GET SAVE8E < 20ey LOADOS (Enecial Correspondent C. F. Bertel li). PARIS, Sept. 9.-Pro cedent dispatches from MaAd by private channels which have been able to evade the censorship of the Sfiañol government, reveal the complete disaster in Morocco. Of 24,085 Spanish soldiers, only 0 could be saved from the horrible carnage and enmities committed by the Moors. Of the 20 soldiers who were able to escape, 35 retained their rifles. S All the armament, including 120 pieces of artiUwía, 2,000 machine guns; 30,000 fusilite) 8,000 horses, 6000 automobiles and airplanes fell into the hands of thelmoros, who reconquered 16,000' square miles of territory. The Njpros forced the Spanish army to "flee to Melilla, which is still under siege. The Spanish "newspapers" claim that the government has sent 62,000 men and 1,444 troops to Meillla, to prepare the great offensive which will begin on Monday (September 19). On the other hand, it is also known that the Moors have redoubled their armies. At the America Theater, tonight will be the première of the buffa play of Puerto Rican actualities entitled SAN JUAN N AGUA O LA LEY SECA by the Cuban cartoonist group of Raul D0 Monte. Also the remarkable film in 7 acts "LA FURIA DEL CUERVO" premiere in Puer to Rico.- For tomorrow Sunday Constance Talmadge efi the comedy "TODO POR UN VELO'Yy Raúl del Monte with the CALDE DE SAN JUAN". These are two great performances at 25 and 35 CENTS. " Advt. DOCTOR BARBOSA In view of the serious illness afflicting the distinguished public man and old fighter Dr. Jose C. Barbosa, we think it our duty to inform readers of the condition of the said gentleman. According to medical reports, yesterday morning it was necessary to submit the patient to a surgical operation in order to counteract the progress of the ailment. Dr. Barbosa was operated in the "Miramar Clinic" by the notable surgeon Dr. Toro with the assistance of Drs. Garcia Cabrera and De la Vega. The anesthesia was in charge of Dr. Belaval and the pulse was attended by Dr. Gutiérrez Igaravídez. Also present were Drs. Avilés, Ashford, Biascochea, Martinez Alvarez, Barbosa and Gómez Brioso. The intervention was carried out in fifty minutes and without any mishap or incident. The bulletin published at ten o'clock at night stated that the patient had not suffered any post-operative setback; that his temperature was normal; that he had slept for a while and that his intelligence was very clear. However, as we are told at the last minute, the condition of the distinguished public figure inspires great alarm. Pray heaven to work a miracle. "Rialto" Premiere in Puerto Rico The Grandiose dramatic production "The" Women" by the famous director William A. Brády Tomorrow Sunday Great Society drama "THE SENSATIONAL BET" by the popular actor Frank Mayo FOR SALE: Automobile "CADILLAC" Model 1920, 7 passengers, full equipment. Machine perfect condition; little use, in San Juan only; excellent paint. Will be sold for best offer "CASH" received on or before September 20. For inquiries, Telephone 259, San Juan, PO Box 641, San Juan. ,, _u.
Don Rafael Ma. Pietrantoni, distinguished businessman, whose brilliant initiatives in all orders, have earned him a prominent place in our society.
In the other countries, on the other hand, everyone tries to live, dress, eat, etc., etc., as well as possible. As far as housing is concerned, it is well demonstrated that the Puerto Rican people are in favor of having a comfortable, clean home with all the modern conveniences. 1 As far as clothing is concerned, there is no doubt that we like to dress in the latest fashions, just as in any other civilized country. In agriculture, industry and commerce, the country is doing all it can; if not the increase in production that year after year are giving our tie iras; many factories are being implanted in the island, day after day, to manufacture new articles, never dreamed that they could be manufactured here and with ambitions of not only selling them in the local market, but with pretensions to cover the market. In the commercial field, it is really surprising the progress we have made, not only the volume of business that our commerce has reached, but also the progress that every day is more and more noticeable in terms of the presentation of our commercial houses, which do not limit themselves to having their own shops, that are not limited to have their establishments in an old ranch to 1" old, and yes that all the trader tends now to raise own buildings, "ad hoc", for the line to which they have to dedicate themselves and in this way to her mosear our populations and to give them aspect of modern cities. San Juan, our capital, in very few years has given a surprising change, and from a city of ancient type is now turning out to be a modern city, progressive and of a marvelous activity, with a great number of buildings and a great number of people who are interested in the art, of which I was partner and technician at the same time, I have opened my Studio d'Arte Italica with annexed Marble workshop in Tetuan Street No. 1, where I am, as always, at your service. My Technical and Moral conditions are known by all, my works speak for themselves, all announcement I consider it in addition. Your old servant, Olinto BARTOLI, Sculptor. Telephone. P. O. Box 1188. San Juan, P. R. Tetuán No. 1. in front of the Palace Hotel.
He compares it with other towns of equal size and with the same number of inhabitants and finds that San Juan is far above any other town in the world, in its class. What do you think has been the main factor in the progress, advancement, activity, social and commercial life of Puerto Rico, and especially of our capital? Simply the automobile. Remember and meditate on the men who already had the use of reason fifteen years ago and you will notice all the truth that the automobile has been the main factor of the progress of this Island. (Continued "n page 8 ) CINEMA "LUNA" Today reappearance of the outstanding Pilar Conde with premieres of her last couplets received from Spain, the master Ruilopez with the execution of the beautiful dance Sara in his own style, and the film "ADVENTURES OF A CURIOUS WOMAN" by Emmy Wehlen. Tomorrow Sunday special program with Pilar Conde and the film "LOCA DE AMOR" by the famous FRANCESCA BERTINI". Don't miss.
The industrial and economic progress of Puerto Rice is due to automobilism, says Mr. Ratael M. Pietrantoni.
That the spirit of progress is innate (in the Puerto Rican people there is no room for doubt, and this is demonstrated by the marvelous leap that the country has made during the last few years. It is certain that we Puerto Ricans like everything good and that, despite the fact that the island's wealth cannot be compared to that of other countries and abroad, we have a great deal to offer.
The foreigner, before disembarking, has his first impression when he enters the port and sees the myriad of modern docks, regularly with a swarm of steamers as if to show that on land he will come across, not just any town, but a city in full swing, with a lot of life, just like any other in the world.
Last night's meeting of the Central Board of the Unionist Party.
Palm Beach suits from $15.00 to $9.00 Fine cashmere suits from $50.00, $30.00, $25.00 and $20.00 Cashmere suits from $30.00 to $15.50 Raw silk suits from $25.00 to $16.00.50 Raw Silk and Crepe Shirts from $6.50 to $3.50 Wool Pants from $12.00 to $8.50 Assorted Fine Ties in colors from $2.00 and $1.50 to $0.75 and $0.50 Woven Silk Ties from $2.00 to $1.00 and $0.75. This assortment just arrived in the latest JOSE cASCAR Luna 44% next to the "Luna" Cinema.
SENSATIONAL! THE NEW TYPE OF "GOMAS MILLER" SIZE 30 x 3-112 (OVER-SIZE) FOR FORD HAS ALREADY ARRIVED. WE GUARANTEE YOUR SUCCESS. ABOY, VIDAL & CO., INC. SAN JUAN, P. R.
Last night in the private office of the President of the Senate, which is located on the veranda of the House of Representatives, the members of the Central Board of the Unionist Party met to discuss the matter of the Governor's letter. Our Editors Vargas and Pietri, who were on the roof of the building, were surprised by the doorman of the Central Board, having left amid the stupefaction of the members assembled there. In spite of the doorman's feat which prevented our Editors from getting all the details, here is the most important information dealt with at last night's meeting: The Board was informed with the Governor's letter to Mr. Torres, in which he gives him the treatment of "my dear Colonel". The letter begins by praising him for his triumph in the Central Board and the Governor in it expresses his satisfaction that there is now a true American at the head of the Party. He declares in it that he has no animosity against any party in Puerto Rico and says that he is willing to govern with the country, and that he will not favor any American policy. The Central Board agreed to authorize Mr. Torres to answer said letter in the terms he deems convenient and the answer to the same was then given, which Mr. Coll y Vidal already had with him, and in which Mr. Torres thanks the Governor for his congratulations and emphasizes that the true policy of the Unionist Party is always based on sincere and pure Americanism. It was also agreed, in view of the extraordinary gravity that has begun in the illness afflicting the illustrious politician Dr. José C. Barbosa, to appoint a commission composed of Messrs. Torres, Hernández López, Alegría and Figueroa to visit the Miramar Clinic and learn about the condition of the patient in order to express to the relatives of Dr. Barbosa the feelings of the Board for the illness that endangers the life of the noble patrician. At the end of the meeting there was an incident that is well worth knowing. Someone, commenting on the part of the Governor's letter in which he says that there is now a true American in the leadership of the Party, said that this was a stab at Mr. Barceló, to which Mr. Hernández López replied that if Mr. Barceló did not want to be attacked, he should not have left. DR. LOPEZ DE LA ROSA Legitimate German Injections Neo Salvarsan