THE WORLD
9 pAglnaa 3 "Me í Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
14 Offices? Salvador Brau, 81] Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
DAILY IN THE MORNING,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
AHO IN
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
IPubliabed and distributed andar permit (No. 801) -uthorii*' by the Art of oetober 8, 1917, on filo ot the Poet Office of Ban Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. 8. qU> looon. Postmaster General. Xntorod ae second class matter, february 21, 1919, at the Post Offlcs at Ban Juan, Porto 'Bi co. United atetes of America under the Act of march -. 1879 |
| SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1921.
NUMBER 802, *
YER ANOTHER SUN SANK INTO THE SUNSET.
From the early hours of yesterday morning San Juan saw an enormous influx of people from all over the island who came to the capital to attend the funeral of Dr. Barbosa. An unusual movement could be seen at all hours invading the main streets of the town waiting for the appointed time to accompany to the last resting place the mortal remains of the noble paladin. The men all carried in their lapels the portrait of the hero, on a mourning cloth, and in the hands of all the women precious and attractive bouquets of flowers, spoke to the eyes of all of the affection and affection that their people felt for the leader and that in this supreme moment was translated into tears and flowers. The parade of the public before the corpse of the Senator was incessant during the whole day. People belonging to all social classes paraded through the mortuary chamber to look for the last time at the face of the veteran of the patriotic struggles. The imposing demonstration of mourning paid by the people of San Juan and of the island, to the republican leader, was simply grandiose. With it was demonstrated the deep affection and the intimate love that Dr. Barbosa had captured in the hearts of the Puerto Ricans. The whole of San Juan was dressed in mourning, because the atmosphere was filled with such a breath of sadness and grief that the whole city was gripped by a dreadful sorrow and infinite bitterness. THE LEAVE LEAVE LEAVE: At noon the following loose leaf circulated profusely throughout the capital about the exact time when the funeral procession should leave: departure time of the burial of Dr. Barbosa will be at half past four o'clock this afternoon from the Senate building. The concurrence will be served to occupy their corresponding positions at half past three, according to the order already published, training with the gentlemen who have been appointed to organize the march. The itinerary will be: starting from the Senate, it will take Ciato Street; from there, San Francisco Street, to Colon Square; from there, Allen Street to San Jose Street, and from there, San Sebastian Street will follow the usual route to the cemetery. The observance of these instructions is requested, as well as of the order and place assigned to the participants for the best order of the march.' Femando GEIGEL. President of the Republican Committee. THE DOCTOR'S OOMPUEBLANOS: .three o'clock in the afternoon arrived at 306 is the No. of the telephone of the Studio and MARMOLERIA of old BARTOLI In front of the Palace Hotel.
San Juan, in a special train, a nourishing manifestation of Dr. Barbosa's fellow townspeople, who arrived to pay him their last tribute of admiration and sympathy. AWAITING THE PARADE: Throughout the streets adjacent to the Senate building, since the early afternoon, the public began to acquire strategic positions to witness the funeral parade. The sidewalks were materially crowded with the public along the entire length of the same. On the balconies and on the roofs, many families were also ready to witness the funeral. THE DEPARTURE: At half past four o'clock, and when all the commissions and official representations were duly organized in their corresponding places, the coffin was taken out of the halls of the Senate and placed in the hearse. THE INSULAR POLICE: A picket of the insular police broke up the parade in correct formation. A HUNDREDS OF WREATONS: Two rows of ladies and gentlemen, on each side of the street, carrying precious wreaths and bouquets of flowers followed. The number of wreaths was so great that it would be difficult for us to determine the exact number of wreaths. However, we would not be exaggerating if we say that there were more than a thousand wreaths. Among the many wreaths, all of which were beautifully made, one of Barros' wreaths attracted the attention of the public, which was exhibited in the showcase of "El Tiempo". The cushion was made of evergreens and was a tricolor arch (blue, red and white) with the American flag in the center of it also made entirely of evergreens. LA CORONA DE BARCELO: One of the most beautiful wreaths was the one sent on behalf of the president of the Senate and of the Unionist Party, Mr. Antonio R. Baxceló. THE FUNERAL CARRIAGE: Then followed the funeral carriage, which was materially covered with flowers. THE GOVERNOR REILY: Immediately behind the hearse were the children of Dr. Barbosa and then marched Governor Reily, accompanied by his military aide and other well-known personalities. THE DIFFERENT COMMISSIONS: Then followed the various commissions and representations of all the organiza Se plisa y forran botones. A CARAZO, Bran St. 72.
CRUSHED STONE | FOR PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION J ; ' Good concrete requires hard stone clean of earth ] ] ] ¡; and coarse. Use our BLUE LIMESTONE ROCK whose cleanliness and durability we guarantee. * We deliver it to the construction site. Call phone 604, San * I Juan, P. R. ' ' ' ¡ ' See samples at our office San Justo 37 altos. " ; CALAF & DEL VALLE, San Juan, P. R. I + I Li Miss Aída de Capetillo y Delgado HAS DIED Her sisters Doña Josefina, Teresa and Irene; brothers-in-law Don Joaquín Villamil and Don Juan Barrera; her aunts Doña Isabel Delgado and Doña Rafaela de Capetillo; her cousins Srs. Delgado and other relatives and the Mercantil J. Villamil & Co. invite their friends to accompany the corpse to the last resting place, ■ I Santurce, Stop 12, September 24, 1921.
The parade was closed by two companies of the National Guard, and was attended by officials, political parties, the press, and the general public. Several of the gentlemen who made up line number two, most of them well-known politicians, after the end of the mournful ceremony showed their displeasure towards the person in charge of maintaining the good order of the same, who we were told had moved to the first line, leaving behind the one that corresponded to him, so that many people joined the referred line, who, according to the plan, were not called to appear in it. PORTO RICAN FLAGS AT HALF MAST: In some balconies we saw Puerto Rican flags, which were at half mast as a sign of mourning for the irreparable loss that the country has just suffered. But what culminated in many favorable comments by the general public was the fact that the buses "Tosca" and "Africana", carried Puerto Rican flags, which were also at half mast. NO BAND ATTENDED: It seems that in obedience to the wishes of Dr. Barbosa's family, no band attended the funeral. CINEMA PUERTO RICO Today Saturday 24 Premiere of the Extraordinary 7 Act Production 'REPUTACION'i by Priscilla Dean . Price 25 cents Tomorrow: LOS OPALOS DEL CRIj MEN 3 and 4 episodes. Matinee I and Evening ■
Imposing aspect of the burial of Dr. Barbosa, verified yesterday, at the instant of passing through the street "Salvador Brau''. In the lower corner, the leader's children and well-known personalities presiding over the funeral procession.
THE TRAJECT RECORDED: The funeral procession rigorously traveled the agreed route in the order in which it was previously published. THE Mourning: When the procession arrived at the Ponce de Leon Square, where a tribune had been placed, Dr. Santiago Veve Calzada, addressed the enormous concurrence in these or similar terms: Gentlemen: Trusting only to my strong will I could dominate a little the deep emotion that overwhelms me to fulfill the task that has been entrusted to me. UNITED STEAMSHIP CO. INC. Announces in advance to her favorers, the departure of the steamer LAKE FLOURNOY from the gulf ports, October 10 next. Order your cargo for that date via United SteamshipCo. Inc, Villar & Go. Inc., Agts. Gen. Phone 347. P. O. Box 201. SAN JUAN, P. R. Teatro "America" S 'hoy hoy hoy Premiere in Puerto Rico Cenizas del Pasado By Frank Keenán 5 ACTS
The figure of our immortal Barbosa is so great that only by taking into account the designs of Providence can we console ourselves for the misfortune suffered with the loss of this extraordinary man. Puerto Rico has had many great men. Men of science and character like Baldorioty. Betances and José Julián Acosta; journalists and historians like Salvador Brau; orators, like Corchado, Matienzo and de Diego and inspired and sublime poets, like Gautier Benítez. But all these men developed in different times and in a different environment. The men who have truly shone in this island, for having been the representatives of their people, although separated in terms of procedures, despite having lived united in soul and heart, as well as in the soul and heart of their people, were Muñoz Rivera and Barbosa. If all peoples have had two glorious men who fill with the example of their lives, the history of those peoples: Spain had a Don Juan of Austria and a Gonzalo de Cordova; France, a Napoleon and a Gambetta; Cuba, a Marti and a Maceo; South America, Bolivar and San Martin and the United States of America, Washington and Grant, why should we not have a Luis Muñoz Rivera and a Jose Celso Barbosa? This extraordinary man did not belong to "Reputation" On the occasion of the death of doc. tor Barbosa, the film REPUTATION that was going to be shown at the Rial Cinema on Thursday 22nd will be shown today, Saturday, together with the CINE PUERTO RICO. So the film will be shown at both cinemas tonight. Advt
The film was from Puerto Rico. That is why we see all the people, even his adversaries, paying him this tribute of admiration and affection. The family of our dear friend, his children and his wife who are here, gave me the special request that I limit myself to thank you for the pious act that you have just performed. The same recommendation was made to me by my political friends. But how can I refrain from saying even four words about this great man, who was our counselor and our guide in the struggles for the welfare and happiness of this land? In fulfilling the painful mission that has been conferred upon me to thank you for having accompanied his corpse to the last asylum, I want all of you who have offered to his memory all these flowers, since you have not done all that the greatness of this extraordinary man deserves, to unite all our hearts in a single thought at this moment, Let us raise our foreheads to heaven and unite our souls to weave a spiritual laurel wreath, so that when he feels it on his forehead, he will feel at the same time (if he can still realize things) the divine pleasure of seeing in that wreath wrapped in tears the demonstration of the pain of a whole people whom he knew how to love, sacrificing two? for their greatness and their happiness. And raising a prayer, but not like those ordinary prayers, but a high and great one that springs from the depths of our souls to ask God to welcome him in his bosom because he was great and because he was noble''. When pronouncing these last words, Dr. Veve said them, his voice was broken by the sobs that choked him with emotion. ON THE SHOULDERS OF THE PEOPLE The coffin, at the end of Dr. Veve. n was taken out of the hearse and carried on the shoulders of the crowd. It was wrapped in the American flag and over it a beautiful cross of natural flowers. IN THE CEMETERY An enormous crowd was crowded in the walls that surround the cemetery and more than five thousand souls were pressed under the vaults of the entrance to the city of death in the moments in which the corpse was taken to give it burial. When the crowd arrived at the cemetery, the five sons of Dr. Barbosa expressed their desire to carry the corpse in order to have the satisfaction of being the ones to carry it to the grave, and in spite of the immensely justified noble desire, the emotion of the crowd was such, increased by the fact that it was the last moment to be with the leader, that they offered resistance and it was necessary to congratulate them.
We do not wish to fail to express before closing this information our most sincere and warmest congratulations to the police force of the Island Police, which, in the course of the event, has been so successful that they have been able to give their best wishes to the leader and to the people. We would like to express our most sincere and warmest congratulations to the Insular Police Force, which in a brilliant and correct way knew how to organize the work of maintaining and guarding order, without, in spite of the enormous crowd that invaded the capital on the occasion of the mournful event, there was not even the slightest disturbance of order, nor the most insignificant friction between the police and the locals. ANOTHER SUN WENT DOWN YESTERDAY AT THE OCCASION I - At sunset and facing the sea, which with the hoarse murmur of its waves seemed to mumble a prayer for the eternal rest of the patriot's soul, and amidst the weeping and praying of a whole people filled with grief, we were able to be present at the funeral, We were able to witness how almost at the same moment that the sun was disappearing into the sunset, in the sky of our politics, another sun was sinking forever, which during its passage through this land did not cease to lend to its people the lights of its intelligence and warmth, always with the same warmth as the sun, always with the same warmth as the sun. 1 gence and the warmth, always intense, of his noble and generous soul. NOBLE ATTITUDE OF THE LOGY "SUN OF AMERICA" ' This important organism, of Pon* , ce. has passed the following resolution, 1 which has been sent to Dr. Guiller* | mo Barbosa: "WHEREAS, Dr. José Celso Barbosa passed away in the City of San Juan, Puerto Rico, on the night of September 21, 1921; WHEREAS, Dr. Barbosa was a Mason of high standing who fought for the benefit of our holy cansa, and was a patriot of those who have done honor to the Homeland and to the history of Puerto Rico; WHEREAS, in the struggle for patriotic liberties he was at all times a powerful column that raised the patriotic spirit of the Puerto Rican people; BE IT RESOLVED BY THIS ASSEMBLY OF MASONS: That we all, standing, raise a prayer to the Great Architect of the Universe, and that we make known to the bereaved of the deceased, the immense pain that overwhelms us, for the participation that we have in the deep pain that the Homeland suffers when the egregious figure falls forever, that those of us who knew how to love his greatness, < and those who will know how to perpetuate his memory with dignity, will know how to immortalize him. r I attest that the above transcribed 1h 1 a true copy of the Resolution approved* I (Continued on page DR. DR. LOPEZ DE LA ROSA? Legitimate German Neo Salvarsan Injections.
♦ ' * T.'H ¡i Atlantic Fruit Company ]] Pier No. 7. North River. New York. : WEEKLY FRUIT STEAMER SERVICE BETWEEN PUERTO RICO AND NEW YORK ;; With departures from New York every Thursday at 5 P. M. ; ; ; 1 And from San Juan every Tuesday at 10 P. M., Muelle del ;; 3 ;; Malecon, Sections E and F, starting with the steamer ' i I I "TAWAMO" ii I - > on October 4 next. -- Tel. 347 VILLAR Y COMPAÑIA INC. San Juan, P. R. ! " General Agents* ; ' Hiram Gomez. Mayagüez. Ramón Cortada and Co. Ponce. ;; ti h-ii i m" 1 i TODAY "RI ALTO" TODAY I, t THE NOTABLE STAR í "PRISCILLA DEAN" H í IN HIS BEST PEUCULA , I "REPUTATION" I | MATINEE AND NIGHT 4" i iíh i i i "i 'K'eeee i i i M iieee-ee e 1 1* 1