ELAffilNDO
10 pages 3 ctvs, Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
t'ubUahMi "na distributed uad" permit <Ao. t "01> tu* aci ol votvbvr 4, iwi. ■<. ma m ia" t "o.i Otile, ot B.n Juan. Porto Bloc. By order of th. PrMid.nt A R Bor f'o.wiMu, Oeuerel Lnterod m teeoud elaae matter, fehmarv 81. 101." "t th. Poet OHw al R- >"<"■ R * -- ' " ■ ♦""""<-" of mar-h " 1RV"
SATURDAY, APRIL 23, 1921.
YEAR III.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
NUMBER 672.
The "bolsbevikis" government proves impotent.
(FOB CABLE FRENCH) PARIS, April 22.-Vorowsky, special emissary of the "soviets" in Rome, questioned by an editor of the newspaper "Le Journal", admitted that co. munism does not at present respond to the present state of the world nor to its economic development. He added that the experience gained in Russia shows that the time has not yet come to establish integral communism, not even the simple socialism of Karl Mark, as demonstrated by the death blow dealt by Lenine to the aspirations of many of his most exalted proselytes. Vorowsky finally recognized the powerlessness of the "soviets" to reorganize Russia without the help of the other nations of Europe. THE BALLOON RACE IS ANNOUNCED. LONDON, April 22.-The international race of spherical balloons, to dispute the cup "Gordon" will celebrate the eighteenth and eighth of September in Belgium, in which will take part, according to officially communicated, the United States. 440 KILOMETERS WERE RUN IN SIX HOURS 7 MINUTES PARIS, April 22.-The great automobile races which consisted in running three times a circuit, has been won by the famous racer Guyot, who reached the finish line in six hours seven minutes and fifty-six seconds. The runner Delainey and his assistant were killed by a broken wheel. The second runner to reach the finish line was Rougier, who covered the distance in six hours, forty-two minutes and thirty-eight seconds. Gentlemen pharmacists The accredited FARMACIA DE AUGUSTO SALIVA SUCESION, of bfa. yagfiez, P. R. located in the most central place of the city, wishes to lease its premises in the city of Mayagüez, P. R. For information, go personally or write to Blanca Malaret Vda. de Saliva, Mayagüez, Puerto Rico. Advt Se plisa y forran botone*. To CARAZO, Brau St 72. Advt.
Third to finish was Repusseau, who made the course in six hours, forty-six minutes and forty seconds. Fourth was D' Auvergen, and fifth, Dabary. CONFERENCE IN DANTZIG LONDON, April 22.-The international conference to settle definitely the boundary question as regards the ' * corridor ' ' separating East Prussia from Poland and the rest of Germany met to-day at Dant zig, with the intervention of the representatives of the latter nations. THE UNITED STATES RESPECT THE PRINCIPLE OF EQUALITY NEW YORK, April 22-The President of the Pan American Society, at a luncheon given at the "Astor ' hotel to members of the Venezuelan delegation and the diplomatic corps of Spanish America, declared that the North American political foundation is the recognition of the principle of equality among all the sovereign peoples of the New World. On leaving, Gil Borgers emphasized the identity between the revolution in the United States and those that took place in Spanish America. The representative of Chile, Mr. Mathieu, and that of Ecuador, Mr. Elizade, also gave very important speeches. PARIS, April 22.-Among the measures of repression indicated by Mr. Briand, head of the French government, to Mr. Lloyd George, head of the English government, to punish Germany, is the imposition of a tax of 50 to 70 francs for each ton of coal extracted from the metallurgical basin of the Ruhr, which is under the surveillance of French mining engineers. They will inform on the same.
SE, NEEDED: Strong, educated men of good manners, for motorists and drivers, as some of our employees have left their posts and gone on strike. Permanent employment The best paying job in Puerto Rico- Apply in person to the Traffic Superintendent The Porto Rico Railway Light & Power Company Marina, San Juan.
NOTICE - We hereby notify all interested parties that we have been unable to reach an agreement with the Workers' Committee on how to distribute the work equally among the operators who previously worked in the overstaffed departments. The workers' representatives forcibly suspended all work in the departments they had started to work in, which is completely contrary to what was agreed and nullifies the agreement concluded last year. We are prepared to give work to about half of the personnel who previously worked in our factories, PAYING THE SAME PREVIOUS WAGES AND GUARANTEEING THEM CONSTANT WORK AT THE SAME TIME, and we instruct all the workers who wish to work to go directly to the Managers of the different factories, who are authorized to open the workshops whenever a sufficient number is present to justify the resumption of work. Porto Rican American Tobacco Co. of P. R. San Juan, P. R., April 7, 1921.
AN EXCELLENT FIRE DEPARTMENT TO BE ORGANIZED IN SAN JUAN.
Next Wednesday will embark for the United States our distinguished friend Don R. M Pietrantoni, worthy representative of the Republican minority in the municipal Assembly, and a valuable social and financial element of our country. The matter that motivates the trip of our friend is well worth being known by the public, since it means the solution of a very important problem for the security and progress of this community. DON R. M. PIETRANTONI In the middle of La Fortaleza street yesterday we "assaulted" Mr. Pietrantoni, who when asked about his latest projects as an assemblyman told us: -Next Wednesday I am leaving for the United States, where I will visit New York, Baltimore, Philadelphia, etc., to make a detailed study of the different fire departments in each of these cities, and according to the result of my efforts, to make our administration agree to create an institution of this nature, in the style of the best in the North. Mr. Pietrantoni has been authorized by the Assembly of San Juan to carry out these steps, which he will carry out at no expense of any kind to the Assembly. Mr. Pietrantoni told us: "The transformation that San Juan has undergone during the last few years can be described as astonishing. Where once there were small houses, without ornamentation, today there are colossal buildings of 4, 5 and 6 floors, in which life bustles, in an incessant traffic of liveliness and liveliness that grows daily. Soon, perhaps, instead of 5- and 6-story homes
"' W a - TODAY:- COLOSSAL SUCCESS | Great Aristocratic Tanda From 5 to 6:30 P. M. Ü Resurrection x Quijano - - The true queen of grace and é' of cuplé, will premiere new crea- '* clones from her extensive repertoire. *We will also exhibit the drama in five acts - - i "Amor que Redime" ' * by the beautiful and suggestive Edith Roberts 'I There will also be an aristocratic tanda on Sunday at the same time. -i* Prices for this tanda only ❖ ADULTS 40 ots. CHILDREN 20 cts. * In the two customary afternoon and evening tandas, we will exhibit the Puerto Rican premiere of Li-Hang the Cruel - - colossal French film in seven ... acts ;; Extraordinary prices " . TOMORROW SUNDAY - - Great batch of fashion at ten ' - half past ten in the morning, taking ' ' part the incomparable star Re' * surrección Quijano. PRICES: -40 and 20 cts. ;;; For 1 atternoon at five o'clock, great tan- ■ - > aristocratic da at the same prices as in the morning , ' * * In the evening two tandas taking i * * ' part the Quijano, and premiere in i"■ Puerto Rico of the drama in 5 acts, i J THE END OF THE PARTY < > by the very popular ;- J. Warren Kerrigan -? Prices:-50 and '30 cents
floors, we shall have them of 10 or 12, so lj creation of a modern fire department should merit general attention What would happen-we ask the friend-if in one of these tall buildings, or in any of those at present existing, an incen dio were declared? Do you think that the fire department we have, with the meNEW SCRUTINY OF 'EL MUNDO' CONTEST Monsita Rodríguez, San Juan, 21.6C5 Carmen Amador, San Juan, 15,744 Pilar Santana Becerra, San Juan, 10,021| María Cristina Porrata, San Juan, 6,397 Josefina Ruiz Rexach, Santurce, 5,397. Clotilde Benitez Rexach, Santurce 3,520 Angelina T. Jiménez, San J jan, 2,615 I Florencia Quilichtai, Ponce, 1,520 j Patria L. Vivas, Por.ee, 1,203 , Carmen J Aguayo, San Juan, 1,146! Armida Torres, San Juan, 1,120 ¡ Gloria María Vázquez, Cataño, 969 Isolina Mar'ínez, San Juan, 665 Providencia Juan, 640 Rcsa María Roselló, San Juan, 620 Ernestina Rifas, San Juan, 609 Bibita García, San Juan 5f9 JAraceli Vicente, San Juan, 559 Manuela Rocafort, Sar. Juan, 491 Carmen Aponte, Santurce, 390 Maria E. Campos, San Juan, 387 Maria Iriarte, San Juan, 324 Luz Maria Puig, Caguas, 261 Frasquito Bermudez, Santurce, 132 Maria L. M. de HerSA/lex, Santurce, 123 Maria L. Golearia. San Juan, 127 Esperanza Bravo, Santurce, - 118 NOTES: -(1). We inform the interested parties that the canvasses are held on Tuesdays and Fridays, after noon, and therefore, any vote, which is not turned in before noon on those days, will not be counted until the next canvass. (2). -We only publish the names of those ladies who have more than 100 votes. TEATRO AMERICA i Last night was proclaimed by the public the true empress of grace and the Spanish couplet JOSEFINA LOPEZ. And tonight will be presented majestically with an attractive program and to. Also premiere on Puerto Rico of the German film "EL SASTRE WIBEL". t' Tomorrow Sunday "Josefina Lopez" with a new program, and premiere in Puerto Rico of the film ''JUVENTUD BLANCA" by the charming "EDITH ROBERTS". PRICES: -50 and 30 cents. United Stem f Co. Steamer "LAKE FLOURNOY" is expected from Galveston around the 22nd of the current at the port of Ponce, from where it will continue to those of Mayagüez, Aguadilla, Arecibo and San Juan. The steamship "LAKE ELMDALE" is announced to depart at the end of the current from Houston and Galveston, for the ports of this island. Villar Co, Inc. GENERAL AGENTS San Juan, P. R. ¡¡j Warehouse for Quincalleros | :J We have just received an ex- f - < - tense assortment of Laces, Gé- í ' G ñeros de Punto and Quincalla in T ' ' ' é general. X ' We dispatch orders by T I r C-O-D. X ' ' Succession of X - ROQUE GONZALEZ & Co., f "I < - Cruz No- 10. P.O. Box 456. 4 " San Juan, P. R. X
If he had the best elements at his disposal, would he suffocate the incident in a timely manner, or, at least, would he carry out an efficient salvage operation? -In anticipation of this danger, I am working for the organization of a fire department, "1 which at a given moment can perform an effective work, since the current fire department, as well as the previous one, is not as it should be, due to the lack of sufficient and appropriate material to render an unbeatable service, which makes the work it performs extremely difficult. The efficiency of a fire department is not in having a large number of personnel, but in acquiring good apparatus to be able to provide an absolute extinguishing service, regardless of the height of the buildings or the low pressure that an aqueduct may have. PIETRANTONI'S MANAGEMENT Mr. Pietrantoni has conferred in San Juan with several insurance representative houses in San Juan, among them Odiva's and Ezquiaga's, and all have been agreeable to help our friend in this respect. The house of Ezquiaga, according to reports, has offered to give, provided the corps organizes itself, a powerful extinguishing pump, which is moved by gasoline and which can work with sea water, with magnificent results. Mr. Pietrantoni also met with Mr. Alberto Lee, president of the Insurance Board, who will cooperate with him in this regard. It is a logical belief, said Pietrantoni, that as soon as San Juan has a good fire department, ■ the insurance companies will have to lower their rates, since there will be greater security for the insured property. SIGNAL SYSTEM Among the new things continued on page 8a. í Surprising news for shoemakers and textile stores all over the island. 1 ❖ A new assortment of materials 1 " is awaited by the next va- ¿ '' by arriving from the United States j composed of: '' Black Boston calves. * Black full-grain sanitary calves. Brown calves. * í -' Black Boston calves. * v Full Grain Satin Calves - * I Boston Red Color Calves- í ' '' Grey Seal. ' A Black Glacé Calves. - ... Cabritilla Glacé Havana Brown - Cabritilla Glacé Color Brown. ' ' " Super- - .... - ... - ... Charoles Corrientes ' ' ' ' Black satin saddle pad and of natural color ;■ -- Saddlery shoe leather ' - ' Saddlery saddle leather ' - ' Saddlery saddle leather ' - ' Saddlery saddle leather. 'Vaqueta for saddlery. ' " Sole for footwear of all * - - - kinds at prices never seen in - Puerto Rico. .. - . - - 4" Production of a batch of - DRILES brands: * T GAELITO, DICTADOR, VIC- : y TORIA, FAUSTO, ARDILLA, - t ARRIERO, GAITERO, LO| CUST, CARIBEAN, ÑIPE in ; various colors. ■ -£ CEPHIROS OF THE BRANDS < X HACENDOSAS, RISING- ¡ ; ' SUN and other items such as IR- ' -- BLUE LANDA at prices that X there is no one to compete with in Pto X R ' co - f Pizá Hermanos S. en C. ' San Juan de Puerto Rico. i SE REQUESTED ; A mechanical engineer with e> r perience in locomotives. Address to P.O. Box 1415, í San Juan, P.R.
The Cubans denounced the reciprocity treaty.
(From our correspondent in Havana) The president of the "Asociación de Hacendados y Colonos de Cuba", doc tor Miguel Arango, has declared that if the American Chambers approve the project increasing the duties on sugar, he considers that all the producing forces of Cuba, as well as the Government, should protest against this project, which is absurd, and considers it a patent injustice against the Cuban people, which should not, according to him, be peacefully tolerated. Mr. Arango hopes that all of Cuba's active forces and the companies that produce it will know how to protest against this attack on Cuba's main industry. I The Reciprocity Treaty, which had reason to exist when it was approved, because it benefited both Cuban and American industries, does not produce any advantage to Cuba today; on the other hand, it gives advantages to the American producers, since thanks to it the Cuban market is almost closed, not to the countries that compete with the American industry, IN ORDER TO FIX THE TROLLEY STRIKE. Yesterday, the Commissioner of Public Service, Ledo Travieso, was conferring with the Governor, who explained to the high official the situation of the present strike of drivers and motorists and the steps that had been taken up to the present to solve it. El Ledo- Travieso expressed to a commission of strikers who visited him that the matter should be submitted to a Committee éFetraTífcerta ih tegrado by three members: one from each of the parties interested in the matter and the third appointed by these same. This was accepted by the Co mission, Mr. Domenech, Director of the 1* Trolley Company, having been notified, who at the time of our visit to Mr. Travieso had not yet replied on the matter. The general opinion is that the motorists' strike will be settled at any moment satisfactorily for both sides. Three Flags Cinema TODAY - SATURDAY 23 - TODAY THE BRIDE. 13, first episode and the drama in 5 acts Blue and Red Blood by George Walsh.
For this reason the President of the "Asociación de Hacendados" believes that if the tariff increases are approved to the detriment of Cuban industry, he considers it fair that the Cubans, in accordance with the right granted to them by the article of the Reciprocity Treaty, should denounce the said treaty, taking away at once the benefit it grants to American industries, preventing the entry of articles from other countries, and thus nullifying competition. The Association of the Federation of British Industries is working for the conclusion of a commercial reciprocity treaty with Cuba. The Cuban government, in this situation, is obliged to protect the national production with the conclusion of new treaties with England, Spain, Argentina and the nations that offer effective reciprocity. Now it remains to be seen whether the American government does not consider this treaty as a gesture of hostility towards North America, and will give rise to protests in the United States. LICDO LOUBRIEL We are pleased to congratulate this esteemed friend for having come out perfectly well from the accident suffered by his affectionate son Uli| ses, who put the eraser of a pencil in his ear, in such a way that his life was in danger for some moments, during which all was anguish and anxiety in the home of the most esteemed gentleman. Thanks to the promptness with which the specialist, Dr. Molina de St. Remy, and the skillfulness of the doctor, the gum was removed with extraordinary skill, and calm and tranquility were restored to the family.The family, to whom we reiteratn-'s i our congratulations, as well as "1 | Dr. Molina of St. Remy Priscilla Dean In private life it is said that c" ! this is the sweetest and most charming woman;; but in the movies, my God! This ¡original woman is worthy of the praise of many criminologists recently while working on the completion of her great >,r ; .... "Outside the Law" Priscilla was a o. . < honorary member of the National Association of Traffic and Hcy - cional Association of Traffic and hcy is assured that "Outside the Law", the most horrifying drama ever produced, will be found. See it soon at the Rial'o, e' P r that Borinquen and the "Tres Banderas" J 1 Advt.
CUBAN CIGARETTES "PARTAGAS' ¡ I am pleased to advise my numerous clientele that I am estfy -_ receiving from HAVANA a quantity of the FAMOUS < Cuban Cigarettes "PARTAGAS" and of which I am sole distributor in Puerto Rico. Ask for them in all the good establishments of ' San Juan. Wholesale and retail at EL RUBI. JOSE REDONDO Salvador Brau 32. Telephone 807. San Juan, P. R. The Porto Rico Railway Light ; & Power Company will pay the sum of One Hundred Dollars, ($100.00) gratuity to the person supplying information. The Porto Rico Railway Light & Power Company will pay the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) as a gratuity to any person who furnishes sufficient information for the arrest and prosecution of any person or persons who cause damage or attempt to cause damage or destroy property of this ' Company, or who obstruct or attempt to obstruct the movement of electric cars. MANUEL V. DOMENECH General Manager.