ELM'JNDO
18 pages 3 cents Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50.
. i Offices: d ' ' - <" Salvador Brau, 81 ' Til. 833 P. O. Box 345 ;
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ANNUAL III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
Publtobod and dúiributed andar permit (Jio. SOI) auláoriied bj tbe Aet oí ueiobet fl, IO1T, on ftia at the Poet Office of San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the Preeident, A. p- Bur laaon P "Htn<"ter General. Kntcred aa second elaae matter, febraary 21, 1910, at the Poet Office at San Juan, Ptgto R1 eo. United Statue of America nnder the Act of march *. 1ST"
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 22, 1921.
NUMBER 826.
On Act No. 75 to regulate the employment of minors.
Children under fourteen years of age shall not be employed except in farm, garden, and domestic work. Those over fourteen years of age and under sixteen years of age, may not work without obtaining a permit from the Chief of the Bureau of Labor, or from the Charity Commissioner of each municipality, to whom the Chief of the Bureau of Labor has delegated, with the approval of the Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, to obtain which, the child himself must appear with a letter from the employer explaining the occupation he is going to give to the applicant; proof of age, consisting of a certificate from the Civil Registry, and in case the child is not registered, a negative, and in substitution the baptismal certificate, and a school certificate stating the grade attended in school, signed by a school authority and a medical certificate proving the child's physical and mental condition, height and weight. For aliens, a passport or certificate of arrival issued by United States immigration officials, or any documentary evidence of the child's age satisfactory to the Chief of the Bureau of Labor, or a medical certificate of the child's apparent age, is sufficient. Children, that is, those under eighteen years of age, may not work before eight o'clock in the morning or after six o'clock in the evening, nor more than eight hours in a day, nor more than forty-eight hours in a week. Those over sixteen and under eighteen years of age, in order to work in permitted occupations, must present to the Labor Bureau, in San Juan, or to the Commissioner of Beneficence in their municipality, a certificate from the Civil Registry, baptismal certificate or other satisfactory document to prove their age, accompanied by a letter from the employer, and shall obtain from the Chief of the Labor Bureau, or their representatives, a letter from the employer, and shall obtain from the Chief of the Labor Bureau, or their representatives, the necessary documents to prove their age, The child shall obtain from the Chief of the Labor Bureau, or their representatives, the Charity Commissioners in the municipalities, a statement authorizing him/her to work eight hours per day, as expressed in the preceding paragraph, in those occupations not prohibited as dangerous to the health, life and morals of children and minors. The permission that a child has to work in one occupation, may not be used to work in a different one, nor with a different employer. Children and minors under eighteen years of age are forbidden to work in quarries, tunnels, excavations; girls under sixteen years of age may not work in any store where cigarettes or tobacco are sold, or in boarding houses, as ushers, servants or ticket-takers in any theater or place of entertainment. BUY CHEAP AT "La Gloria" Fortaleza, esq. San Justo. V. ARRIVI CO. S. en C. advs.
25,000 workers fight with police in English capital.
LONDON, Oct. 13.-Hundreds of people were injured this afternoon in one of the most sensational demonstrations against joblessness in London's historyMore than 25,000 unemployed, most of them ex-servicemen waving red banners and defiant in a march of several miles through the working-class districts of the metropolis, intended to invade Downing St., and request an immediate interview with Prime Minister Lloyd George. The demonstration was thwarted by the extraordinary measures taken by the police officers of Scotland Yard. Thousands of mounted and foot police were stationed in strategic positions in the heart of the West End district. They were able to clear protesters from the busiest streets. On several occasions a communist spirit was visible in the beautiful crowd resulting in there now being a dozen or more nurses healing the broken heads of demonstrators. A battalion of police charged the demonstration in Picadilly Circus after the rioters attempted to break through I03 cordons and burst into London's famous open forum, Trafalgar Square. Although the authorities expressly forbade the parade, ten substantial gru pes standing out from the bulk of the column, followed by the police, invaded the West End just as the matinee crowds spilled into the streets. Women and children, many of whom fell to the ground in the riot, were taken home in ambulances. The mounted police, as Jos disobeyed the order to clear the streets, charged left and right up Shaftsbury Avenue. Hundreds of demonstrators fled to the Soho district, where they broke a large number of crista les in their retreat. The scene there had every character of culminating in a dangerous riot, but the leaders of the movement, after some ineffectual onslaughts in which stones and bricks were thrown and women and children were knocked down, gave way and dispersed at last. Hundreds of Scotland Yard officers surrounded Downing Street, where Prime Minister Lloyd George's Cabinet was discussing the Irish situation, the Washington conference on arms limitation and the lack of jobs. Only those on urgent business were allowed to pass. That the government became aware of the
cATLANTIC FRUIT COMPANY OFFICE: 17 BATTERY PLACE, NEW YORK, N. Y. Departures Thursdays at 5 P. M. from Pier No. 7, North River. From San Juan, Tuesdays at 5 P. M. from the Malecon (Sections E & F) Steamship "TANAMO" Will be dispatched on October 25th -Admits cargo and passengers. VILLAR & COMPANY INC. General Agents. San Juan, - -- Puerto Rico. R. CORTADA & CO., Ponce --UHIRAN GOMEZ, Mayagüez.
WOODS - WOODS - WOODS i We have the schooner "ROSE MARY" unloading at the Malecon in front of the Collective, which is bringing us a large cargo of WOODS of all sizes, which we will sell on SPRING at VERY LIMITED prices. We recommend that you do not make your purchases without first visiting the < Industrial Company of Santurce PEDRO BOLIVAR S. EN C. ' Phones 425* 321. Box 250, San Juan, P. R. <
The writ of mandamus against Governor Reily, which was filed yesterday in the Supreme Court by Ledos. Rivera Zayas and Benjamín Guerra-Mondragón.
The following is the full text of the petition filed yesterday in the Supreme Court, in the mandamus case against the Governor, regarding the dismissal of Mr. Jiménez Sb ■ cardó and Mr. Torres Monge. Although a separate petition was filed in each of the cases, since both are the same, we publish only the one related to the case of the dismissed judge Jiménez Sicardó: EN EL TRIBUNAL SUPREMO DE PUERTO RICO GUSTAVO JIMENEZ SICARDO, Petitioner. VS, E. MONT. REILY, Governor of Puerto Rico, Respondent. Civü No. MANDAMUS PETITION TO THE HON. SUPREME COURT Petitioner appears for his pro Strike and typhoid strike Utuado Expanding on our" information of yesterday, sent by our correspondent in Utuado, we can inform our readers that, for some days now, more than one hundred and fifty mena, who were working on the road leading from that town to Lares, have been on strike. The motive for this movement is due to the fact that the employers refuse to pay them a salary of more than sixty cents a day, which the strikers consider excessively poor. / In the Muñoz Rivera plaza of that city, a large protest meeting was held on that occasion, in which, according to our reports, several agitators took part. The speakers expressed, among other things, that the Government should act in this case to prevent the workers from being victims of exploitation by the bosses. We are also informed by our correspondent that there is immense alarm there, due to the fact that there are more than five hundred cases of typhoid fever in the whole region. The "Anemia Clinic" has been converted into a large hospital for those attacked by typhoid fever; and at the sides of the building nine departments have been improvised for the purpose of confining more people. The Health Department, which has been operating there for days, has proceeded to vaccinate all persons residing in the infected places. Doctors Lastra and Aparicio are in charge of the treatment of the sick, and very few deaths have been recorded. The seriousness of the situation is demonstrated by the preparations taken. Although there were no deaths or serious injuries today, there are fears of a repeat of today's demonstration in the heart of the city. The Metropolitan Police is taking measures to combat similar disorders. "Rialto" TODAY-Puerto Rico premiere Robert Warwick in the six-act drama "In Missouri" CURRENT PRICES Tomorrow Sunday ? Sessue Hayakawa in the drama in six acts - EL PINTOS DE DRAGONES SE ALQUILA Local own for all kinds of business, the most central and the coolest of San Juan. Tetuán 28, corner to Tanca. Will inform: FREIRIA & CO.
and through its attorneys R. Rivera Zayas and Benjamín Guerra Mentir agón. and as cause of action, respectfully exposes: l. -That the petitioner is of legal age, married, lawyer and neighbor of the city of San Juan, P. R.; and the respondent is of legal age, married, resides in the same city, and currently holds the office of Governor of Puer-' to Rico. II:-That on the fifth day of May, nineteen hundred *intiuno, the petitioner was appointed by the honorable Arthur Yager, who was then Governor of this Island, with the advice and consent of the Senate, to the office of Municipal Judge of the Municipal District of San Juan, First Section, for a term of four years, from the date of his taking the oath of office, with an annual salary of $2,400.00. m. That on the fifth day of May of the year one thousand nine hundred and nineteen hundred and twenty-five, the petitioner was sworn in and took possession of the aforesaid office, the term of which was to expire on the fifth day of May of the year one thousand nine hundred and twenty-five. IV.-That the petitioner has been actively and constantly exercising said office, from the date on which he was sworn and took possession thereof, until the sixteenth day of October, nineteen hundred and twenty-one, when he was surprised by a letter from the Commander, Governor of Puerto Rico, immediately removing him from office; which letter, literally transcribed, reads as follows. \ EYECUrmr MANSÍOÑ-Porto Ri co: -Office of the Governor.-Governor's Palace.-San Juan, Porto Rico.-San Juan. Porto Rico.-October 15f 1921.-Mr, Gustavo Jiménez Sicardó, Municipal Judge of San Juan, San Juan Porto Rico.-Sir:-This is to notify you that I have this day removed you from the office of Municipal Judge of San Juan, for the good of the people of Por to Rico. Same is to become effective at once.-Yours truly,-(Signed) E. Mont. Reily.-Governor. ' ' V.- That only by said letter, the respondent, Governor of Puerto Rico, unlawfully and arbitrarily deprived the petitioner of the exercise of his office with its inherent rights, without formulating charges of any kind, nor granting him notice thereof, nor hearing, nor any opportunity of defense to answer the charges, present his evidence, and if he so desired, permit him to confront and cross-examine the witnesses against him; without just cause and without the due process of law, in open and fiaMunicipality of San Juan NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC The residents of San Juan, Puerta de Tierra, Santurce and Río Piedras are hereby notified that next Monday, the 24th of this month, at seven o'clock in the afternoon, the aqueduct service will be interrupted to change the pipes between stops 20 and 21 on Ponce de León Avenue. The work is expected to be completed during the night and early morning hours of the following day. M. TRAVIESO Commissioner of Public Service, Police and Prisons CINEMA "NORMA" Today's sensation "HEMBRA" Extraordinary prices. THE FAMOUS - J/IBONOC™ I IS NOW ARRIVING, on sale in all souls. - > ; ¡ cenes of provisions. For in ¡ I I ;; general training contact ¡¡ :i B. Fernández Hno§. Sucrs.:: ; ;; Marina, San Juan, P. R. !!! . > ♦ ♦
Erante violation of the law creating the office of Municipal Judge, approved by the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico in nineteen hundred and four, and amended in nineteen hundred and five, of the first subsection of Section two of the Organic Charter of Puerto Rico, and of the fourteenth amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America. VI. -That the petitioner has been deprived, in the manner expressed, in an illegal and arbitrary manner and against his will, by the respondent, Governor of Puerto Rico, of the exercise of his office, and immediately after receiving the transcribed letter, fulminating his immediate removal, the petitioner requested the respondent to reinstate him in his office, by letter addressed to him by mail and under certified envelope. dated October seventeenth, nineteen hundred and twenty-one, which is transcribed: "í}an Juan, P. R. Oct. 17th. 1921.- Hon. E. Mont. Reily, Governor of Por'o Rico." San Juan, P. R.- Sir. Your letter of the 15th. inst. received, removing me (Continued from pfi. 3a.) Great uneasiness among the taxpayers OF BAYAMON I Some proprietors -.trios of estates ur i bañas in the municipality of Bayamjn [-we have been told that ¡a retasa i ción d? The property, which is being carried out in that municipality, is being carried out on such a basis as to result in an average increase in the exact value of the properties. In view of the need of that municipality to build an aqueduct, work is being done to obtain a loan for said work, for which it is necessary to increase taxation, proceeding with the aforementioned reassessment. Authorized persons inform us that the reassessment is being carried out by the official appraisers of the Department, but according to the reports supplied by the municipal administration of Bayamon, which they assure us are greatly exaggerated. There are properties, we have been told, that have been appraised for twice their value, and many owners have even replied offering them for half the value at which they have been appraised. Although no formal protest has been made in this regard by any of the above-mentioned owners, it is known, however, that most of them will appeal to the Board of Revision and Equalization to claim their rights. We also have some complaints regarding this same matter, from property owners in the city of Sur, where we are assured that the same thing is happening on the occasion of the reassessment that is being carried out in that town. Cine Puerto Rico __ TODAY - Saturday. - TODAY - Night of joy, pleasure and emotions, with the exhibition of the great episodes of the series of - adventures, titled - THE MIRACLES OF THE JUNGLE AND the beautiful comedy of bathers, which is titled "THE PLUMBER" Do not miss this opportunity to have fun. The steamer "Atrato" will leave on Tuesday for the Island. Information: P. R. Rogers & Co. Telephone 1084. Button plating and lining. A. CA.RAZO, Brau St 72.
Great honors were paid to General Pershing.
(BY FRENCH CABLE) CHERBOURG, Oct. 21.-The ship "George Washington," in which General Pershing is traveling, was saluted by the batteries of this place with a volley of 16 guns. Fierce Attacks against the Head of the Government PARIS, October 21.- Strong debates have arisen in Camara, attacking the voyage of M. Briand. The Head of the Government believes that France should be represented by him. If Lloyd George is going on behalf of Great Britain," he added, "I do not know what reasons there are why I cannot go on behalf of the Republic. In official circles there is an impression that the majority will give Briand wide powers to attend the disarmament conference. MR. HERRICK DID NOT CREDIT THREATENING LETTERS WASHINGTON, Oct. 21- The United States ambassador in Paris, Mr. Myron T. Herrick, who miraculously escaped the bomb which -stalled at his residence in the French capital, did not take seriously the threatening letters he received, on the occasion of the conviction of two Italians in Massachusetts. The Washington government has reports that there is great indignation among a group of Italian Communists because of the above-mentioned sen tence. THE ACTION OF THE*HEALTH DEPARTMENT WITH RESPECT TO LAW NO. 75. 75 The Department of Health, having learned of the protests which have been made on account of the operation of Act No. 75, passed July 20, 1921, to regulate the employment of minors, reports for general knowledge, that its intervention in this matter has been confined exclusively to informing the Bureau of Labor as to which occupations are injurious to health, according to the scope of the law. In order to enumerate such occupations, he used as a basis the list of occupations reported by the Labor Bureau in a communication dated September 1, 1921. The actions of the Health Commissioner, therefore, have been purely of a scientific nature, expressing his opinion from a medical point of view, and all of this by unavoidable mandate of the Law. SEAMSTERS We need expert seamstresses and seamstresses to work in our factory. Apply personally to MORRIS E. STORYK Isabel II No. 5 altos (Marina) SAN JUAN, P. R. Diego Agueros & Co, 60 ALLEN ST. 60 Sells GENERAL rubbers, the queens of Puerto Rico.
Neighborhood houses will have a depot for letters.
As this is a matter of great interest to the country, we are pleased to publish in a preferential place the following letter from the Postmaster of San Juan: 1 San Juan, P. R., October 21, 1921. Mr. Editor of EL MUNDO, San Juan, P. R. Distinguished Mr. Editor: The Postmaster General of the Nation (Postmaster General) has profusely distributed in all the post offices of the United States a circular letter for the initiation of a campaign in favor of the establishment in the tenement houses, in all the important towns, of receptacles to deposit the mail addressed to the tenants of this type of housing, (Apartment Houses.) You know perfectly well what the Postmaster General of the Nation (Postmaster General) has done.You are well aware of the abundance in Puerto Rico, especially in San Juan, of these houses where fifteen or twenty tenants live on the first floor, mostly laborers, who are not at home at the time when the letter carrier delivers the mail, which results in many letters being returned or sent to the Dead Letter Department. On this important matter, I have already addressed the President of the Homeowners League, requesting his cooperation, to which I have no doubt the said respectable gentleman will agree. And in requesting that you also cooperate in the crystallization of this project, I beg you to publish this letter on the front page of your popular newspaper. I return to you, Mr. Director, with the highest consideration, your most affectionate friend, Ramón Alfonzo RIVERA. Postmaster. THE "BULL INSULAR LINE" HAS TAKEN ANOTHER FREIGHT REDUCTION The BULL INSULAR LINE, INC. has just received a cablegram from its New York office advising it that, as of October 29 the freight rates between New York and Puerto Rico have again been reduced by ten percent (lOofo). On August 23 of this year this company reduced its rates by ten per cent. between New York and Puerto Rico over those in force in June, 1977, making a total of twenty per cent. more or less, in relation to the rates formerly charged. WASHINGTON, ocfulye 21."- Yesterday several seismic movements were recorded in the Georgetown observate- * rio. - 1 Tomorrow Sunday at the theater ■ America, Eugene O'BRIEN in the drama the Occasion of his Life' and finale "Ruth of the Mountains. "* Also great concert by the orchestra of 30 mandolins dírijidas by maestro MANOLO TIZOL Great evening of art on Sunday. 35 and 25 cents lunettes.
Cheese "ORPI" THE BEST CHEESE OF PUERTO RICO (Awarded with the "Gran Premio" in the Industrial Exposition of Caguas). If you can't find it in your Colmado, ask for it directly. Always ask for the brand PEDRO ORPI Manufacturer. Arecibo, Puerto Rico.