ELM1NDO
8 page* 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year,$7.50 aoaooeooeooeeeeeaeooeaooooeeeMOoeM "eae "aaaMaa "MaM "iaaM(aat(aa<e""aaanaaaa"
Office*: Salvador Brau, 81 Tal. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
FabllaMad "*i diatribwted pansit (M". sol) ---toitoaé-" * y th" Áel ""tobar S, 101T, "a lie at the Poet OfSae of Bon Jun, Porto Bieo. By order "Í th" President, A. S. Bwldeon, Pootataatcr General. Entered as toeond olaoe Mttar,"-brear" 11 1918 at th" Poet Offlo" at Han Jnaa. Porto Mg n United Btatee of Aterirá ender the A "t of "arch I 1ST"
ARO III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
SATURDAY, MAY 21, 1921.
NUMBER 696.
England orders evacuation of German territory The London Government asks France for explanations.
LATEST REPORTS ! RECEIVED ON THE ! SUGAR MARKET - New York Cable: "65,000 sacks of Puerto Rico sugar sold today at $5.02; ! 10,000 sacks in launches offered at $5.14; firm market." "Puerto Rico sales at $5 02 114. There are more bferts at $5-14 cif. with no buyers." there have been some changes in the market these past few days- Recent sales have been made, with <m aurnen to in the price of more than 20 cents, which begins to raise hope again among the sugar growers. The trend in the market is upward and higher prices are likely to be traded. - The refined sugar market remains quiet - all refiners continue to quote at 6-64), minus the 2 percent discount. There are bids for secondhand sugar, slightly lower. Demand is slightly more active than in recent days, and despite the activity seen in crude, refining remains relatively sluggish The forward trading market is in line with current trading and under pressure from daily settlements, with commitments moderate. The spot sugar market remains quiet and inactive. And inactive- No operations have been carried out. -The harvest continues with some irregularity. We are informed that some of the sugar mills on the island have their warehouses full of sugar, due to the present railroad strike. It is believed that at the end of this month or at the beginning of the next many of the mills will terminate the fraEL EMERGENCY BILL WILL BE APPROVED Here is a copy of the cablegram transmitted from New York by Don Jose Ruiz Soler, Secretary-Treasurer of the "Puerto Rico Sugar Producers Association", received yesterday: "The members of the Senate and House who were in conference on the Emergency Bill on Raffles have reached an agreement. A Joint Resolution was introduced in the House, so that the duty rates provided for in the forthcoming Permanent Rate Bill will be effective from the date the Bill is introduced in the House, and if passed by Congress will replace the Emergency Rate Bill during the time it is being discussed in Congress. Chairman Penrose predicts that the Emergency Rate Bill will be passed within this week- Leading brokers express the opinion that, as soon as the entitlement issue is finally adjusted, demand is likely to be more active."
"IT IS THE ETERNAL ENGLISH POLITICS" SAYS THE PARIS PRESS PARIS, May 20-The newspapers all over France indicate that the attitude ¡.subdued by England for some time now, is nothing but that which she has followed since she has been a nation; that is, that of perfidy and deceit. ENGLAND'S ATTITUDE IS MUCH COMMENTED OPPELN, May 20-A dispatch from Warsaw that the chairman of the Polish Council, Vitos, expressed with feeling and sorrow the effect that Lloyd George's speeches have caused among the Poles. According to the speeches of the English Head of Government, the autochthonous inhabitants of Upper Silesia will be Germans, when the Teutonic manuals myself recognize that the inhabitants of this region are of Polish race and language. M. Vitos adds that Poland is willing to comply with the treaty of Versailles, asking that part of Upper Silesia, which is bordering, belongs to the nation decided by the inhabitants; and that the revolution of the Poles in this region would have fatal consequences for the Allies THE RESULTS OF THE ELECTIONS IN ITALY ROME, May 20-"II Tempo", organ of the President of the Council of Ministers of Italy, says that the result of the elections held is the following: 122 socialists, 109 popular, 14 communists, 8 republicans, 6 Slavs, 12 nationalists, 4 Germans, 22 "faeists" and 240 divided among liberal dcmocrats, radialists, "nittists", reformists, orlandists and Balandrists. The Liberals have won 29 seats; the Polarists, 9; while the Republicans have lost 16, and the Communists, 3. FRANCE IS REQUESTED TO ATTEND A CONFERENCE LONDON, May 20--The Foreign Secretary has asked the French Government to send a representative to the next meeting of the Supreme Council, which will be attended by a representative of the United States, as well as those of England, Italy and Japan. Aristides Briand, although he favors the meeting of the Supreme Council, has not yet replied, he hopes that the debates on the foreign policy will be completed in the Chamber. I It has arisen from the bosom of the 'believers, a commission to inquire from the author of the poem "The Christ of Forgiveness" (book that today ; sold all the Bookstores) if the ¡ astonishing miracle that performs the mentioned Christ, is authentic or son of fantasy. Advt.
POLAND REGRETS BRITISH SUPPORT FOR GERMANY
PARIS, May 20.-The situation between the governments of France and England is becoming more and more tense. The latest events highlight the domination exercised by the English with their diplomacy abroad, as well as their eternal predominance in European politics. Not yet satisfied with their security protected by the ocean, they now request the evacuation of Dusseldorf, Ruhrort, Duisbourg, and more than all that, the abolition of the customs cordon imposed by the French Republic on Germany. The newspapers of this city ask what England is now proposing to do, for the evacuation of Germany and the abolition of the customs cordon, means in no way the security of payment by the former Empire; and more than that of payment, the protection of the hatred that is unleashed against France among the Teutons. Great Britain, with its policy, is attracting the sympathy of Germany; and, at the same time, participates in the victories" of the Republic, which, by dint of energy and immense sacrifices, France alone obtains. The newspapers add that France maintains an army which, being only French, protects the allied interests and fights for the fulfillment by Germany of the clauses of the Treaty, while England keeps out of and of the triumphs that France achieves, without attracting the hatred of Germany. Lloyd George's government is not repulsive in the eyes of the Germans, but in the eyes of the French. - ENGLAND TOLERATES ARMED INTERVENTION IN OUpper Silesia BERIN, May 20.-Lively protests by the French newspapers and the latest actions of the English Government show, though not very clearly, that England favors armed intervention in Upper Silesia. ENGLAND ASKS THE FRENCH REPUBLIC FOR EXPLANATIONS. PARIS, May 20-The Chargé d'affaires étrangère of England has by order of his government asked the Republic to give an exact account of what France would do in the event of German intervention in Upper Silesia. This bellicose and suspicious attitude on the part of Great Britain proves once again that France finds herself face to face with England, and unable to count on any support from Albion to enforce her policy in the case of Upper Silesia.
Hippodromn Festival BASE-BALL (J SATURDAY evening and SUNDAY by maiana SATURDAY Josii y [clin and Colombian Baritone i Jose N. Pineda SUNDAY Reappearance of loa nótales ARTISTS ELVIRA LOPEZ MUNOZ AND Luis Manzano sA8Aoo r ooHiN6ograndes gailes ULTIMA HORA - La guarantees "aviarle a au those le. cha de raes, completely pure Te. Mfaao 812 . Bas Juan, Bol tf Street 1(8. lfl*uel Bula Solar Adn. VENEZOLAN MAIZE - ' Diego Agueros & Co.
A STRIKER SENTENCED IN GURABO TO A YEAR IN JAIL.
Isabel Zayas is in the town of Gu rabo uh director of the strike movement. At present they work in the factories of said town about one hundred workers, but the said Zayas ■ wants the absolute stoppage of work, and at the head of twenty-five or thirty strikers tries to, by all means, cortseguirii. On May 7, current, Zayas met with a certain Ismael Searis, one of the "leaders" of the anti-strike movement, and, after provoking him, according to the complaint, by assault and battery against him, he assaulted him, shooting him almost at close range with a revolver shot. Fortunately the situation of the victim with respect to his assailant was the cause that did not produce any damage other than burning his pants by the place where the projectile passed running a transverse trajectory. Yesterday this case was heard before the Municipal Court of Caguas, constituted in Gurabo to hold an oral session. The defense of the accused was led by attorney Pedro Santana Jr-, who displayed great skill in the defense of his client. Testifying as witnesses for El Pueblo were Juan Amalbert, P. L, Ismael Searis, Miguel Candelaria, Jorge Pernales, Francisco Amador, Alfonso Carrasquillo and Ramon Quijano, Chief of the Island Police and "complainant. In his report, Mr. Santana Jr. extended in his considerations that "people who face such situations, like those of his client, in the face of the selfishness and tyranny of capital, are orphaned of any defense, to the extent that everything seems to be conjured against them. That there is an unjust persecution, which begins in the workshops and ends in the street, where it is very rare to find justice for them, at that moment is in front of the court an official whom he does not know personally, but whose appearance and his decisions, which he has read in the press of the country, lead him to believe that reason will come out of there triumphant". Tulio Rodriguez, before passing sentence, expressed his opinion against that of Mr. Santana Jr. "He said that the latter was in error as to the orphanage he was proclaiming of the people who plead orderly and legally against the tyrannies and injustices of capital. That the Insular Police, as well as the established courts, did not belong to any sect and did not serve any special interests.
In the United Kingdom, the revolution spread.
Harding presents the "radium" to the illustrious M. Curie WASHINGTON, May 20.- The President of the Republic, Mr. Harding, accompanied by his thick, the minis, i tros of his Gr.bincto; o! vice. president of the Republic, Mr. Coolidge, and other high personages of the United Kingdom. Coolidge, and other high Government and political figures, presented to the distinguished Polish Ma. ria Curie, discoverer of "radium'', 8100,000 of this marvelous substance, acquired by popular subscription, among American women. The ceremony took place at the President's residence. Maria Curie, who discovered the "radium" in 1893, was accompanied by her two daughters, who wept with emotion. On Monday next the illustrious discoverer will leave for Pennsylvania, Utah and Colorado, where she is trying to make scientific investigations. The resolution will be introduced in the House next week. WASHINGTON, May 20.-Affirms that Secretary of State, Mr. Hughes, will be Chief Justice, in place of White, when international political questions are satisfactorily settled. The opinion is against his being relieved, as there is an urgent need to settle matters of exceptional importance. BERLIN, May 20-The British Ambassador to this city, Lord Aherncn, since learning of Lloyd George's speeches has written to the latter to inform him that he (Lord Ahernon) cannot take part in this policy, nor tolerate the armed intervention of the Germans in Upper Silesia. LINE" We are informed by Messrs. "Sobrinos de (Izquierdo)" that the steamer 'Filadelfla' leaves New York today for Puerto Rico; the "Caracas" arrived on the tenth and n eve; and the steamers "Maracaibo" and "Zu lia" arrived yesterday at Mayagüez from New York and Venezuela, res pectly.
Last night they tried to blow up the train near Ponce.
Late last night our active correspondent in Ponce, Mr. Mo. cete Padilla, informed us by telephone that in the vicinity of Tallaboa, police in a railroad car surprised railroad strikers Carlos Paanceschi, Guillermo Colon, Dior.ísio Carroño, Maximino Vázquez, Luis Franceschi and Francisco Carrefio, who were carrying a dynamite cartridge and a shotgun, at about five past seven in the evening, and when the mail train was about to arrive at Ponce. The dynamite cartridge was in the possession of Carlos Franceschi and the shotgun was in the possession of Francisco Carreño. The aforementioned individuals were arrested in a place near Tallaboa where there is a bridge, which seems to have been their objective if they were really trying to commit an anarchist attack. When they were surprised, they threw away the explosive cartridge and the pouch, which were nevertheless seized by the police. The detainees are still in the barracks and the prosecutor Font with great activity has initiated the investigation of the facts. At eight o'clock in the evening the train arrived in Ponce without any news. THE "TEA DANZANT" OF THE 'CASINO DE PUERTO RICO'' The 'Casino de Puerto Rico' will celebrate tomorrow Sunday, from four to seven in the afternoon, the second "tea danzant" of the series that it has been giving in its regal halls. To infuse it with greater enhancement, the Casino has contracted, for tomorrow's, the acclaimed Spanish duet the Parra, who will liven up the party with new and precious numbers. As on last Sunday, it will be well attended by beautiful ladies and elegant young people AT THE FEDERAL COURT Dar-anta all yesterday morning and afternoon about 20 cases for offences against the prohibition laws were heard at the Federal Court, the majority of those convicted having been sentenced with light fines, having been found guilty, and the hearings of others having been adjourned, having been found innocent.
11 iy. Orar dlrs Exit t: Puerto Rico Premiere We are pleased to present the best film produced by the popular MARY PICKFORD in ¡ PAPAITO PIERNAS LARGAS (Daddy Long Legs), Extraordinary at popular prices. Matinee: Seniors 20. Children Evening: Seniors 35. Children 20. Nahaa "bit of the aplHlMo Ovetts THE MINUTES Auction Monday, May 23, 1921 AT 2 P. M. At ni Muelle del Malecon AAA Cement Barrels vvv Belgian. In perfect condition Sacks of - vM sugar empty. ISIDORO D. DELGADO Almonedtro Público
Theater "America" TODAY PREMIERE IN PUERTO RICO Second Programe M<d I Ciático "The Underwater Treasure" By KATHYNS ADAMS and JACK HOLT- Price" current". TOMORROW Morning Matinee from 10 1/2 to 12 A. M. with the evening film. Matinee-Fin.l d-1 'Danger of a Secret' and "The Modernists" At Current Prices. In the evening, the film "My Cousin Caruso" and the Duet "The Modernists" Monday: "CHAPLIN'S WEDDINGS" Current Prices. Plisa and forran botone*. A CARAZO, Brau St 72. ! Advt. Q o noPDcíts a good ven ~ t uu liüuuullu dedor for SWEET, with knowledge w in the business. L Erie Sumersille Go., Inc. TETUAN 68
Notice of Public Hearing ' WORKERS' COMPENSATION COMMISSION Pursuant to section 10 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, the Commission shall proceed before July 1 to classify and group the occupations of laborers, according to probable hazards or exposure to injury, and shall fix the rates of fee qúc to be paid by employers of laborers in these groups, in the next fiscal year. To this effect, the Workmen's Compensation Commission has set next Monday, May 23, 1921, at three o'clock p. m., for the holding of a public hearing to hear on such classifications, groupings and assessment rates from all persons having any interest therein. All persons who for any reason cannot personally attend the hearing may send duly authorized representatives or appear in writing. I San Juan, May 17, 1921. Luis Samalea IGLESIAS. President. Advt.
Municipal Theater Great success of the . "QUIJANUO" Today. Saturday 21 Today. SECOND FAREWELL FUNCTION AT 8:45 P. M. -Tomorrow Sunday.- Two great performances. Matinee at 3:112. For children from three years up to 80. IF NEEDED Galvanized corrugated iron Galvanized barbed wire Twisted square rods General lumber. Llarne a z Compañía Industrial de Santurce PEDRO BOLIVAR, S. en C. Telephone 425. P.O. Box 250. SAN JUAN. i
I By EARLE ( REEVES, 0 I. N S-. StaflX'orrespondent.
LONDON, mgy<>, 1J-England is passing through a revolutionary phase, but revolution at last in the sense that the old patterns are disappearing and giving place to the creation of new values, according to Ernest PB?nn, treasurer of the Industrial League and a noted writer on commercial peaks, and adviser. We are- I- I mos creating an ínpewi scale of values especially in human señes, i She leads to spasmodic uprisings such as the hy¿j'<a of coalmen and to ma'jr' intelligence of the true situation by other nations. Anyone who knows the character of the British people, will have no fear of bloody revolution. "Labor has to settle a large score with the capitalists and is now settling a small score on the other side. I think there are many things to be done, but the important one is the determination to re-establish a higher standard of living."--I The settlement of the reparations question will have no bearing on the economic situation. "The reparations question has never been serious for us. No one believes that we are going to get anything from Germany: when we do get something to the standard of German products, we take steps to stop the movement through lack of employment." Benn considers the United States a hundred years at least ahead of England in labor conditions: "I see your people upwardly ambitious, determined to go forward, while we are alienated and unable to shake off the suspicion that wealth is a fixed quantity to be shared - our workers have lately been the victims of Communist theories. We have 150 branches of socialists, but their fundamental common sense keeps them in order". Benn emphasized the importance of perfect intelligence among the English-speaking races, saying that war is impossible. Prime Minister Lloyd George's statement was the first official admission by the British cabinet that the gigantic war of labor in which the country has been engaged, has to(Continued on page 6)
American Railroad Company of Porto Rico Some of our personnel having voluntarily abandoned their duties, we require mechanics, engineers and stokers with certificates of competency and good conduct, for immediate permanent employment. We are also desirous of employing, as Station Chiefs, a number of young men of good character, not less than 21 years of age, and who have attended the seventh grade of elementary school. For this purpose we are orga- ; nizing a short course of intensive instruction, which will commence immediately. These jobs are permanent. Please address your request, with references, to the undersigned: Emilio S. Jimenez Gen. Manager, American Railroad Co.