ELWNDO
- 8 pages 3 cents Semester, $4.Q0 An affio,$7.50
- . Office:; ■" : Salvador Brau, 81 í : Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345 -
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
ABO III
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
The Governor has requested the resignation of Ponce Municipal Judge Torres Cordova, Esq.
THE GOVERNOR SAID HE WAS UNAWARE OF BARGELO'S ARRIVAL AND ADDED THAT HE DID NOT KNOW HIM.
After the arrival of the head of the Unionist Party, Mr. Barceló, public anxiety has increased extraordinarily, awaiting the action to be taken by the leader in the face of the ongoing political conflict. The comments made in all political circles are of such a nature that, judging by the disparity of opinions, it is not possible to realize the exact result to be expected from the situation. The only thing in which almost all the political elements are happy is that the situation will be settled, for even though Don Antonio has kept the most absolute reserve, since his arrival, it is known that he is confident in the justice of the American people, and therefore he is full of frank optimism. "THE RESIGNATION OF SE. TORRES CORDOVA Yesterday the rumor circulated in San Juan so insistently that the Governor had asked for the resignation of the municipal judge of Ponce, Ledo. Torres Córdova, to such an extent that a colleague in the afternoon echoed it. One of our editors was later able to verify the veracity of the report. The causes that have led to the decision taken in this sense by the Governor are completely unknown. However, for the past day, it has been seen that Mr. Torres Cordova has refused to issue search warrants requested by the Ponce police, without duly completing the legal formalities. IN THE ECONOMIC COMMISSION Yesterday afternoon the meeting of the Economic Commission was held, at which Mr. Barceló took possession of the chairmanship, and presented to the Commission his points of view concerning the economic situation of the country, and the steps he had taken in this respect in "Washington. The Commission expected the Treasurer and the Auditor to appear at yesterday's session to give their respective reports on the Treasury situation, but at the last minute it was reported that Mr. Benedicto was at the Executive Council meeting. THE EXECUTIVE BOARD MEETING Since Governor Reily took office as Governor, the Executive Council had not held a meeting, except for the day on which it met to approve the resolution of condolence on the occasion of the death of Dr. Barbosa. - BUY CHEAP AT "La Gloria" Fortaleza, esq. San Justo. V. ARRIVI CO. S. en C.
I Yesterday afternoon, at Fortaleza, and i under 4a presidency of the Governor, the heads of departments, who compose the Executive Council* met to discuss the question d" the issue of bonds to the value of se ; ? millo, nes of dollars for municipal borrowings, as specified in Act 64 passed by the last Legislature. Although some of the members of the Council are in favor of the said bond issue, the Governor was opposed to its being carried out for the present. There was, therefore, no final agreement on this matter. The Governor proposed that Mr. Huyke be authorized to appoint one hundred 1 more professors, who would be por-1 torriquefios and fné approved unanimously. DETECTIVES REPLACED IN THE SERVICE Detectives Dario Suarez, chief of the Ponce post and subaltern Da niel Perez Sanchez, who had been separated from the service were reinstated yesterday. - Chief Suárez, upon being notified of his reinstatement, immediately resigned from his post, alleging that he wanted to devote himself to private business which gave him a better return 1 MR. CORDOVA DAVILA RECEIVES MANY MESSAGES Since his arrival in Puerto Rico, Ledo. Córdova PÁyjJJa has received innumerable messages of greetings from San Juan and the island, to all of which it has been impossible for him to reply, .so he begs us to thank us in his name for these many of our affee to and sympathy. WHAT HE SAYS In order to know the truth regarding certain rumors that the Governor had received letters from Washington, the contents of which would mark a new stage in the politics of the country, one of our editors asked the Governor for his opinion regarding the political situation after the arrival of the President of the Unionist party, Mr. Barceló. | I was unaware that he had arrived," replied the Governor, "but I do not know this gentleman. Our editor understood that the whole interview was over and that the present and future political situation, while Governor Reily's administration lasts in Puerto Rico, was fully explained. WE NEED a graduate or undergraduate Mechanical Engineer with general practice in the management of shop work. Must be knowledgeable and well recommended. "Address your application with details expressing minimum salary, to INGENIERO, Apartado 359, San Juan.
4 Don José D. Moreno Santi HAS DIED His legitimate and political siblings Da. Carmen, Isa. bel, Jesús María Moreno Santi and Don Juan Hernández Lopes; legitimate and political nieces and nephews Isabel, Nicolasa and Dolores Moreno; Francisco Baralt, Antonio Romero, * Josefina Barceló de Romero, Arturo Moreno, María, Elias de Moreno and other relatives beg their ami. Please assist to the conduction of the corpse, from the mortuary house (Salvador Brau 90) to the cemetery of this city, act that will take place today Saturday, October 15 at 4:30 in the afternoon. San Juan, P.R., October 15, 1921. t No obituaries are distributed. BARGAIN IN SUITS FOR GENTLEMEN . "LA CIUDAD CONDAL" ~ CRUZ 8, SAN JUAN.
(Published and distributed and" penait (So. 801) "atUoriielb, Aei "i October 8. 181?, on Sl" el the Post Oíflee of í Sen Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President. A. 8. Bur leenn." Pn,tmaater General. Entered aa aaeond elate matter, fabmary 11, lili, ai tha Port Oflea at San Juan, Porto United Stataa of America andar tha Art of march 1, 18T" '"- 1 1 1 ="==-< -- ■ .... ■
A UNIONIST PROPAGANDIST WAS SHOT DEAD IN GUAYAMA
By unofficial news arrived ' yesterday in San Juan, we learned that in Guayama was shot to death the orator and propagandist of the "Union of Puerto Rico" Julio Lopez, well known in the island and mainly in that district. Last night we communicated with the very active prosecutor of Guayama, Mr. Quiñones, who gave us the following interesting details of the event: The victim, Julio López, had a bazaar in Guayama, which was located next to the barbershop of Benito Colón Cordero. It seems that Lopez was missing from his establishment one hundred and some dollars, so he immediately informed the police, who began to make the corresponding investigations. | The suspicions all, it seems, fell on Lopez's neighbor, the barber Colon Cordero, who was taken to the barracks on Thursday in order to assist in the investigation. At twelve o'clock that day, the police released Benito on the condition that he would present himself again at two o'clock in the afternoon to continue the investigation. It should be noted that between "Julio López and Benito Colón there seems to have been some enmity due to political differences. When Colón was released, it is supposed that he thought that the accusation of robbery of which he was victim was due to a denunciation of Julio himself, and a quarter of an hour later he went to his barbeIría, in the patio of which he met Julio López who was closing the doors of his establishment. Thereupon, Colón began to shoot at López, who ran towards the Qddfélica Lodge nearby. i Colón, having fired the five capsules from the revolver, reloaded it and fired two more shots at him. Julio Lopez received three wounds, all in the back, as a result of which he died within ten minutes. The first authorities to arrive at the scene were District Attorney Quiñones and the marshal of the District Court, who arrested the gunman and seized the weapon. i The District Attorney qualified the act as first degree murder and did not set bail. | The autopsy of the corpse was performed last night by Dr. Gonzalez and Dr. Lassisa, one a Republican and the other a Unionist. This event has produced in Guayama, and other neighboring towns an enormous sensation, because the victim was a person who enjoyed general sympathy not only for being well known, but also for his excellent reputation and good conduct. GENERAL PERSHING TO VISIT LONDON LONDON, October 13.-The Foreign Office announces that General Pershing will visit this capital on the second of the present month to place the medal of honor of the American Congress on the tomb of the "Unknown English Soldier" in Westminster Abbey. The Foreign Office also publishes a manifesto in which it states its point of view on the incidents which have caused so much unrest on the occasion of General Pershing's visit. DON PEDRO MIRANDA Coming from Santo Domingo, whose Republic he traveled from one end to the other, on business of the important and reputable film firm of which he is the enthusiastic manager, returned yesterday to San Juan on the French steamer "Carabellé", the educated and highly esteemed young Don Pedro Miranda, representative in Puerto Rico of the respectable firm "Universal Film Mfg..Co." Mr. Miranda, who was received at the dock by many of his friends, is very well impressed with his excursion. We send him our warmest greetings of welcome. PUERTO RICO CINEMA, TODAY! - SATURDAY - TODAY' Big event. The special super-production I - "BROKEN CAPULOS'' - - O - - "FLOR DE AZAHAR"- DAVID W. GRIFFITH'S most famous play Extraordinary prices.
Protest by a Puerto Rican.
1 ±- Translated from the newspaper "The Wond". It would seem, at first glance, that Mr. EeLy's purpose is the Americanization of the island from the Republican point of view, to prove that during the eight years of the Democratic attaints. 1 Democrat tration the policy of the former administration became peda- ¡ zcs and created incompetence and disloyalty to the American flag. If we study the facts i tai and co- 1 as they are, we will understand that Governor Mr. E.ÍMont Reily is trying to discredit the '"record" of Mr. Yager's administration, simply 1 because the other ejra Democrat and nothing else. || j The present Governor of Puerto Ri- ' co is playing politics of the worst kind, for he is damaging the good ' r.cmbre of the whole nation in the eyes ; of foreigners and trying to enhance 1 the reputation of another pcKtic party. | Now, the Democratic party has done much more good for Puerto Rico, in the eight years of its administration, than has the party of the fepiblical party, in the eight years of its administration, has done for Puerto Rico. 1 than the Philippine party from the McKinley to Taft administration, and, if the islanders, in spite of whom they may pose, enjoy citizenship and more self-government, it is due to the great thinker who sat not long ago in the White House and who left office in March 4 . "When the whole world expected that a Democrat or any other governor versed in politics, who knew the temperament of the Latin people, would continue to govern us, the Republican party instead of following the same democratic policy, chooses and sends as Governor of Puerto Rico a middle class citizen, better known in the board of directors as a "financial broker". | Do you not think, Mr. Editor, that in this day and age the abominable practice of allowing Governors to be sent to Puerto Rico for rewards from the White House should be avoided? After the protests made by the Puerto Ricans that Mr. Reily should continue as Governor of Puerto Rico, and that it was believed that the powers in Washington would require him to change his ways, at least, news is received from Puerto Rico that the Governor is continuing his blunders by asking for the resignation of all the members of the Health Department, substituting for them, mainlanders and Republicans of the country. I The Unionist party, (the party of the i majority) has already broken off relations with j , the Governor; he is governing the Island with the little group of the minority, and we find ourselves at present with a situation which has no precedent^in the annals of the history of Puerto Rico since the advent of the stars and stripes. D. COLLAZO. THE UNEMPLOYED ARE JAILED I In* Baltimore City, Henry Me , Graf, who was out of work, l was sentenced to serve a month in jail for begging for alms in the vicinity of a church. MR. REILY Ponce, P. R., October 15, 1921. I EL MUNDO, San Juan P. R. I Enthusiastic reception for the Governor all along the line. Countless automobiles, all equipped with the FAMOUS "FISK" RUBBERS, join the motorcade. We agreed to raise a rubber monument to Mr. FISK for great services rendered to motoring. Colonel FISK. Advt. 'WBBEB8MTOIH" TODAY. Great drama. TODAY. Arthur Bourchser -in "The Great Day" Stupendous creation in five acts, of extraordinary emotional force. Dancing, after the cinema From 10 to 11 and 1|2.
THE LAW ON THE EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS WILL COME INTO FORCE ON THE 18TH.
OFFICIAL NOTE FROM THE LABOR BUREAU In accordance with the opinion issued by the Commissioner of Insular Health, at the request of the Chief of the Labor Bureau, from the eighteenth day of October onwards, which begins to govern the * Act to regulate the employment of minors and provide for the compulsory attendance of children in schools, and for other purposes", minors under 21 years of age will not be allowed to work in the following occupations, because they are harmful to the health of the people.The following occupations are prohibited for being harmful to the health of children and minors: WORKSHOPS:-Mirror cutting, smelting, blacksmithing, washing and ironing of clothes (of persons affected by contagious diseases), polishing of brilliants and other stones, tanneries. MANUFACTURING:- Fertilizer fertilizer, fertilizer, fertilizer, cigarettes, cigars, bread, (leaf removal), perfumes and medicines, (when not handling poisonous substances.) OTHER INDUSTRIES:- Sawmills, sugar mills, (in those works that have relation with the machinery), tobacco stalking, tobacco picking, stone crushing. "THE KING OF LIFE" MARRIES AT 146 TO 25-YEAR-OLD Zaro, of Constantinople, the oldest man in the world, has married a 25-year-old Turkish girl. Zaro, known as * ' The King of Life," is still working, and has been offered huge sums of money to visit the United States, which he has refused to do until after his honeymoon, which is now his fourth. RAFAEL W. CAMEJO DISTRIBUTES THE "CASINO ESPAÑOL" PRIZE AMONG BENEFICIAL ASILADOS Don Rafael W. Camejo, the poet laureate of the Certamen del Casino Español, of San Juan, has distributed the prize money among the asylums for tuberculosis, children, lepers, the deaf and dumb, and other charitable institutions. The poet Camejo's noble deed, in distributing his prize among the country's charities, highlights his kind heart and deserves the applause of all. THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE The following matters were discussed at the meeting held yesterday at the Chamber of Commerce: Various amendments to the Rules of the Chamber; the matter of Insurance Companies; on publication of rulings; tariff of caches; amendment to article nineteen of the Constitution on fa cultures of the Board; amendment of article nine of the Rules, on "Amount of the claim?*; project of a Banking Association; giving account of the post and transport service; admission of three resignations of members and acceptance of two applications; Regulations of arbitrations, apportionment, cost and other expenses and publicity campaign. DON EDUARDO G. GONZALEZ LEAVES THE "RIALTO" Yesterday we received news that our distinguished friend Don Eduardo G. Gonzalez sold his participation and interests in the "Rialto" theater, to Messrs. Bruno and Vazquez, valuable and well known elements in our society. We understand that Mr. Gon zálek, whose courage and enthusiastic initiatives gave the "Rialto" a powerful boost, will in the future dedicate all his activities not only to his business of commissions and representations, but also to the "OLIMPO" theater, of whose corporation he is treasurer, after having been its most enthusiastic organizer, and which theater, which promises to be the most splendid of the island, will be inaugurated at the beginning of December. We have no doubt that Mr. Gonzalez, given his outstanding merits and the sympathies he enjoys, will conquer new triumphs in both businesses. Teatro America Today Saturday premiere in Puerto Rico "THE DOUBLE ADVENTURE" episodes 3 and 4 and a comedy by Chato Tomorrow Sunday:- The drama "* "HIS POINT OF VIEW" by -ELAINE HAMMER8TEIN-
OCTOBER 15, 1921.
NUMBER 920.
The banquet given last night at the "Palace" in honor of Mr., John B. Huyke proved most brilliant.
I WILL NOT RECOGNIZE THE FOURTH PARTY NOR DO WE NEED IT--SAID THE GOVERNOR LAST NIGHT.
s announced, the banquet given to the new Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico, Mr. J. B. Huyke, was held last night at the Palace Hotel. More than 200 guests were seated at tables, in the large dining room of the Hotei, where a large ame-*' I rican flag was displayed. The ceremony was attended by Governor Reily, as well as the heads of the Department, Messrs. Mestro, Benedicto, Estoves, Camuñas, etc.; as well as distinguished elements of politics, commerce and banking, whose names we do not publish in order not to be too prolix. An excellent orchestra entertained the event, playing beautiful Creole pieces that earned the approval of the select concurrence. The menu was splendid. Many of the diners had to call Mr. Agudo, MANAGER of the Hotel, to congratulate him, as well as the organizing committee of the event, Messrs. Carreras, Urrutia and Oneill, to whom the splendor of the event is largely due. Mr. Mestre took the floor to offer the banquet and to exercise the position of "toast-master". After a brief exordium he announced Ledo. Carlos U. Urrutia, who began by saying that he did not intend to speak on that occasion and that he believed that only three members would speak. He said that he did not intend to speak on that occasion and believed that only three members would speak, representing the three political parties. He explained how they had organized the tribute to the first Puerto Rican to hold the most difficult post in the island's government and said that they had invited all the department heads, teachers, inspectors, municipal commissioners of education and other friends and admirers of Don Juan B. Huyke and apologized to the thousands of admirers who were not invited because, he said, there were so many that there was no room in Puerto Rico to accommodate the million admirers that Mr. Juan E. Huyke has on the island. He gave a history of the life of Don Juan B Huyke and thanked all those who had attended to pay tribute to the first Commissioner of Instruction of Puerto Rico. Mr. Mestre announced the Mayor; Mr. Travieso began by saying that he had been told to speak for 3 minutes, and said that the occasion was to speak not for three minutes but for three hours. He said that he had had two occasions to speak about Huyke, but in this one he was going to speak on behalf of Mr. Huyke's party, Mr. Mestre and his party and he announces that representation to say that the Unionist Party applauded the appointment of Juan B. Huyke. He added that he did not need a notarial act to say that the Union was proud of this appointment and if it was not so, he should feel proud; that to say it was enough the representation conferred by the "toast-mas-CINEMA "LUNA" Today, the interesting comedy in 5 acts entitled "MARRIED BY MOMENTS" with the beautiful actress MADGE KENNEDY.
Mr. Huyke, Mr. "Toast-master" and he were Unionists and were to lead the party along the path it should follow to salvation. - He added that this appointment was not to be celebrated by Unionists alone, but by the whole country, because it was one more trench that Puerto Rico was reaching under the administration of Warren G. Harding and Governor Reily, and that Juan B. Huyke, who had been born under our palm trees, had the right to occupy this position. Senator Tous Soto began by thanking them for giving him the opportunity to say a few words at that great festival. He recalled the banquet that was given in Ponce to Mr. Travieso and Mr. Domenech and said that it was the first step that was taken in Puerto Rico towards the attainment of the liberties of the country with the American citizenship, and this appointment of Juan B. Huyke shows that in a not distant time with the loyal citizens of Puerto Rico the Independence, the Republic of the Country, will be achieved, but making the star of Puerto Rico to be part of the blue quadrilateral of the American flag. He made a history of the knowledge he had of Mr. Huyke, in whom the American sentiment and the Puerto Rican sentiment were twinned. He mentioned, to this effect, the discussion of the Bill of I language, the camouflage of Huyke in defense of the representative act of Mr. Valdes and the one he recently made in the bosom of his party in defense of his ideas of the "Association with America". He said that Huyke was a guarantee to form the character of the children of Puerto Rico, and that the first time the Governor heard the name of Huyke was pronounced by him and Mr. Tódd in the town of Mr. Reily. He added that he had solicited Mr. Huyke's conI sentiment to recommend him to the Governor and that in doing so he was thinking only of the future of Puerto Rico and the future generations of the p-us. Friend Huyke, at this moment I speak not only on behalf of J. Tous Soto but on behalf of the Republican Party, and I say that my party does not applaud your appointment, but endorses it, as it endorsed it before it was made. He ended by saying that in the schools the children are writing the constitution of Puerto Rico, as a State of the American Union. (Continued on page 2.) Municipal Theater - TODAY - SATURDAY - TODAY!- Premiere of the very interesting buffa play El General Bobo in one act and three scenes, original by Arquimedes Pou; and several beautiful numbers by the famous Spanish duet, of world renown Dory Uttam premiered last night, with resounding success -¡MANANA!- - -MARAÑA!- In the "matinée", a great and attractive program, which will make the audience laugh. In the evening, farewell of the Company, with two colossal premieres.
l WOODS - WOODS - WOODS i; " About to arrive large shipments of WOODS of '- ... all dimensions which we will sell on QUAY - at. 'I VERY LIMITED prices. We recommend not to make your '' Iá purchases without first visiting the " Industrial Company of Santurce Pedro Bolivar S. en C. Phones 425, 321. Box 250, San Juan, P. R. The best assortment in thread and silk suits, has "LA CIUDAD CONDAL" I CRUZ 8, SAN JUAN. 4 " " J