ELMÉNDO
8 pages 3 ctvs. Semester, $4.00 One year, $.7.50
Offices: Salvador Brau, 81 Tel. 833 P. O. Box 345
MORNING DAILY,
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR III |
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO ' j
Governor Mr. E. Mont Roily tried by the Licio. Dexter
The prominent and well-known American lawyer, who returned from the United States on the steamer "Ponce," stated his stay in the North had renewed, with the new Governor of the island, Mr. Mont Reily, an old friendship of twenty-five years, and assures us that he has chosen Mr. Mont Reily to fill the office of the first authority of the island. Mr. Dexter, in referring to the qualities that adorn the new governor, expressed himself as follows: "He is an affable man, a democrat, of great personal magnetism, a friend of the poor, shrewd, diplomatic and very well prepared to face the responsibilities of his office". The trip to the LedoDexter States was due to his being hastily called from his home in Kansas City, last month, on account of being taken ill of some care by his lady mother. M Dexter has returned in company with his daughter Nora, who was attending Marymount Academy, at Tarrytown, on the Hudson. Mr. Dexter says, with great satisfaction, that his respectable father's condition has improved remarkably, and that even though the attack on the reason might be repeated, there is no fear now. It was during the week that he remained at his home in Kansas, that Mr. Dexter renewed his acquaintance with Mr. Reily, and on being asked for his impressions of the new chief executive of the Island, he expressed himself in the following terms: "I saw Governor Reily every day during the six days that I remained in Kansas. Since our first interview, a "ja áñihrtad that began more than 25 years ago was renewed between us. It was a source of great joy and satisfaction to me to find in him the same affable and democratic Mont Reily of the old days, but now adding to all these conditions that indefinable something which characterizes those who have been in contact with powerful men, and who have great and advanced ideas. But, going further, when you talk to him, you are immediately impressed by the fact that you are dealing with a man of profound knowledge and great experience. Only a keen observer, or a very intimate friend, would be able to give you a glimpse into his inner self. -i - ? -Yes," Mr. Dexter replied. I am sure that Mr. Reily is a very shrewd man, and perfectly prepared to meet all the responsibilities of his position. He is also a great fighter, for he is always ready to fight in a good cause. In short, he is a true tactician and a great diplomat. One of the things he told me was the following: "Frank, I have to give opportunities to everyone, big and small. I have to make the humblest pawn buy, that I am (Continued "to page "1 "America" Theater Today Great Debut Of The Troupe Anímeles Amaestrados 4 Monkeys, 4 Dogs, 1 Goat and U movie The Doll Carver 35 cents the lunette. Tomorrow, Sunday, Matinee. Special with the Animals. Matinee and Evening Premiere in Puerto Rico Qjos del Alma and new numbers for the animals. Come early today and tomorrow Sunday. Button plating and lining. A CARAZO, Bran St 72. Advt.
VARIOUS MATTERS OF IMPORTANCE AT THE PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE IN SN. JU AN
To the kindness of Prosecutor Diaz Collazo we owe the following matters: The filing and dismissal of the case against the guards Domingo Lugo and Francisco Morales, who were accused of infringement of Article 138 of the Penal Code, was ordered. It was alleged that said guards assaulted Francisco Picornet, as a result of which he died; but from the investigation carried out, it was found that Picornet died as a result of a fall he suffered on board the "Marina", which, together with the tuberculosis that undermined his bones, caused his death. -Manuel Miranda, from Vega Baja, seduced Alejandrina Sierra, 18 years old. He has been set bail for $500 -tPcr first-degree assault, Ernesto Lopez and Aniceto Diaz have been arrested. These two subjects, protected by the shadows in the early morning of June 28, entered Cattrillon's store and stole a ham from him. What a ham they both got into! -1,000 bail has been set for Manuel Sierra, who inflicted 10 wounds on Tomas Martinez with a machete in Dorado. -For the same offense, a bail of $1,500 was set for Francisco Olmo, who is accused of having abused the girl Mercedes Cruz, of Cataño. -For selling a pair of shoes that belonged to someone else, Luciano Rosario was charged with first-degree assault. The shoes, which belonged to Casimiro Rios, were taken by guard Lopez. "EL LEON DE COLORADO" ■ -- I For having appeared in our yesterday's edition the last paragraph'and the signature interspersed in a different article, we reproduce boy the beautiful work that with the title of ''El león de Colorado", J. Dempsey, y George Carpentier", sent us our excellent collaborator in Añasco, don R. Arri llaga Boqué. "STRAND" Theater STOP 10 Today- Saturday 9 -Today Grand premiere "Bajo el Cielo Andaluz" exciting drama in 7 acts. by George B. Zeitz and June Caprice 2-Tandas -2 The Porto Rico Drug Co. PONCE, PUERTO RIOO DIVIDEND PAYMENT On July 10, 1921, as expressed in the text of' our preferred stock, we will pay to the holders thereof a dividend of 4 per cent corresponding to the first so mestre of 1921. The stockholders who wish to do so may go to our Ge ' neral Offices in this city to pick up the amount; those who do not will receive it by mail. Ponce, Puerto Rico, June 30, 1921. Eduardo Díaz BRINK, Secretary. Advt. LLEGO LLEGO "What we were waiting for". L The Silent Avenger (Vitagraph). 15 EPISODES 8 PROGRAMS Willians Duncan & Edith Johnson World Film Ce,. Inc. (The House of the Three Days.)
(No. SOljaTithbriáed'by the Act of October 6, 1917, on file at the Port San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the Preaident, A. 8. Bnrte.on, Postmaiter General. Entered as second class matter, February 21, 1919, at the Post Office at San Juan, Porto Rijco, United States of America under the Act of march 3. 1879 || nr*' '"i. r iiJTM..ExaMSS l Vi. *-■' .xa. ■ ., - -r : , .t~t;,, ,m~assSS¡a.i ; zsz-;: ~ t~~~ fa., - ¿i ■■ j , A. fat.... , ■■ ■.. ■
MYSTERIOUS 0 U Q U E APPEARING NEAR PHILADELEIA, M.
(By French Cable) BOSTON, July 8.- The officers of the "Munson's Munalbo" say they found on the 30th of bunio in the vicinity of Cape May, the mysterious pirate ship, which came within a few cen tenars of feet. In the same way that it appeared - the officers say - it disappeared, for it turned back and hid in the fog, without having made any sign, and without making itself known. The ''Munalbo" was 300 miles from Philadelphia and was bound for Bal timore. THE POLESTS AND GERMANS CONTINUE THE RETREAT OPPELN, July 8.- Since the 5th, the greater part of Upper Silesia has been free from the insurgents, Poles and Germans. According to the plan of the High Commission, the region of Buthen, south of Kattowitz, on the Polish coast, has been vacated, and Kreuzbourg has also been evacuated. GREEK TROOPS FORCED TO RE-EMBARK AT MARA AND MURSSIL CONSTANTINOPLE, July 8- Under the formidable Turkish offensive, the Greeks landed troops at Mara and Surssil, but had to re-embark, in all haste. t Greek headquarters will abandon the Brusa front for fear of a Turkish o/ensive. PARIS, July 8.- A dispatch from Vienna announces that the Czecho-Slovakian preiisa expresses its gratitude to Mr. Bockfeller for having given this multimillionaire 27,000,000 crowns for the construction of the Czecho-Slovakian Institute of Public Hygiene. This generous gesture underscores the desires of the United States for the development of the Slavic nation. THE GREEKS SUFFER A DISAPPOINTMENT IN ASIA MENOB - - ANGOBA, July 8.- An official Turkish communiqué assures that the Greeks have suffered numerous losses in the furious encounters" in the vicinity of Ismid. In the Douchacl sector the Hellenic troops were totally repulsed. POMEBENE CALLS FOR SUSPENSION OF SHIPBUILDING WASHINGTON, July 8.-Sen. Pomerene has introduced a bill before the Senate to suspend shipbuilding for six months. This bill is due to the fact that the leading nations are determined on naval disarmament.
Formidable dynamite explosion last night
In the "Epinosa" quarry in the jurisdiction of El Dorado and near Vega Alta, a truck loaded with 200 boxes of dynamite went over a cliff. When the truck went over the cliff, the engine caught fire, producing the explosion of the dynamite, which caused considerable damage to the surrounding area, and interrupted the electricity in those towns due to the collapse of the power poles" ' t Fortunately there were no personal injuries, because at the moment when the truck went over the cliff, those who were in it, flagged it down in time, with such good fortune that they were completely unharmed. At one o'clock in the morning, the time at which we wrote this information, it was not possible for us to know more details, since the authorities were still investigating. The truck belonged to Bernardo Marrero and Dolores Cruz, and was on its way to Arecibo, to carry the aforementioned shipment of dynamite. The panic caused by the horrible detonation in the nearby towns was enormous, having been even greater when the towns were left in darkness due to the interruption of the electric current. The guards Rodrígrcz and Otert" and detective Fernández searched the house of Críspulo Montalvo and seized 80 quarts of rum and part of a still. The same policemen, joined by guard Pietrantoni, seized a still and 6 quarts of rum in the house of Tomás Bíos, in the "Chícharo" neighborhood. They also seized another still and 14 quarts of rum in the house of Bernardo Torres, 22 Nueva Street. THE MAIL TRAIN DERAILED NEAR PONCE Police officers Emiliano Feliciano and Cándido Pacheco, on duty on the railroad, reported last night that mail train number two which left Ponce yesterday morning for San Juan, had derailed seven kilometers from Ponce, in the "Quemaos" neighborhood. The accident occurred at 7:35 a.m. and was due to the fact that the train rolled over two oxen that were on the track, belonging to Don Lucas P. Valdivieso, of Ponce. Only the conductor car was derailed, and it took about an hour to repair the damage and put it back on the track, so that yesterday the train arrived in San Juan with a considerable delay. The engineer and stoker who were driving the train, San Luis Pagani and Jose Barrientos- In the accident there were no personal injuries EXPLOSION OF UT< AIRSHIP CAUSES FOUR INJURIES NEW YORK, July's.- The explosion of the airship "C 3", at Hampton Roads Naval Station, caused four injuries.
Woodstock School Shorthand and typing in summer crash course. - Study in THREE MONTHS. Don't waste your time and money on long courses. We teach by the French method of combined groups. VALUE OF THE COURSE $7.00. Oscar A. Gandía Director. Highway 114. / Santurce. quarrel in ponce IDEAL REFRESH guaguas regulations Have been denounced in Ponce, par" weather EJ issued a warrant d2 for quarreling in the street, Jose Ramos, TR A T arrest against Genaro Guardio Francisco Negron and Felix Pagan. 11W1 Gervaclo Castro, Felipe Diaz, DoNow, it is the turn of the Municipal Court to mingo Flores and Catalino Ramos, for quarreling with the scandalous A TAPON IA v PIÑA infraction of the Traffic Regulations Ramos, will crown him with flowers; Pa- IvKUlTJA and rUMA I gán, they will make him "Aojar la mosca; and to "" P* rUa -' de las Negrón, they will put as his apelli- 1 he Tropics! Fruit Juice Co. to each Un ° Se e seiu arcn 10 do, T "láf<">9 949. dollars bond.
SATURDAY, JULY 9, 1921. -T" aaEzxza ri i n ... .
GERMAN PRESS RUDELY ATTACKS SEPARATE PEACE.
(By French Cable) BERLIN, July 8.-The restablcclmion of peace between America and Germany has been greeted with reservation by newspapers throughout the former Empire. The press says that the establishment of peace will have no repercussions from the economic point of view. Good relations between the two nations will depend on the attitude assumed by the United States on the Versailles treaty. The newspaper "Taglische Runschau" reproaches America for its entry into the conflagration, and for having made Germany trust in an honorable peace, based on President Wilson's 14 points. The newspaper says that America can do much for the former Empire, such as preventing France from using the Treaty of Versailles to oppress Germany politically and economically, which also harms the interests of Great Britain and the United States. THE SUGAR MARKET IS STRONG AT $4- 1|4 New York Wires: "Sold 4,500 sacks from St. Domingo and Canada at 2-11 ¡16 - (2,687.) 300 tons from Brazil at 2-518 (2,62-112.) 25,000 sacks from Pto Rico at New Orleans at 4-l|8. Firm market at $4.00. -4-118 can be had." "Sold 47,000 bags from PR- at $41 [8; 7,000 from Cuba at $4.1 ¡8; 4,200 tons from Puerto Rico at $4.114 and 500 tons from Philippines at $4.1 ¡4- Market is strong at $4.1|4-" "Sale of 20,000 bags for Philadelphia at $41|8 cif. Can be sold at higher price." CONTRALMIRAL KITTELLE IN PUERTO RICO " Coming from St. Thomas, and on the American steamer "Vixin," arrived in San Juan, the Rear Admiral of the American Navy, Mr. E. W. Kitteller. who is coming to this island on a tour of inspection of the naval forces here, and particularly, the radiotelegraph stations of the island. The distinguished guest, who is coming to Puerto Rico for the first time since he was appointed Governor, is staying at the Palace Hotel, and will probably return to St. Thomas this afternoon. On different occasions when referring to information concerning Mr. Kittelle, we have said that he holds the office of Military Governor of the Virgin Islands, but this is not true, since this office is a civilian one, and his appointment is made by the President of the United States. If the Rear Admiral of the Navy, who is head of the naval forces of those islands and of Puerto Rico, has been appointed, it has been simply as a matter of economy. Mr. Kittelle is, in addition to being the civilian governor of the Virgin Islands, head of the naval station.
J THE CENTRAL 'PORT: REAL' IS IN THE HANDS OF RECEIVERS.
Yesterday a suit was filed in Federal Court against the "Estate of Don Enrique Bird Arios", by the firm of "L. W. & P. Armstrong". W. & P Armstrong, of New York, for the Court to place in the hands of receivers the Puerto Real plant in Vieques, with all the properties belonging to said "Estate of Don Enrique Bird Arias", already deceased. The plaintiffs allege that since the death of Mr. Bird Arias the de mand idos have been dedicated <_.l culti-. vo, sale, etc., of sugar cane, for which business the de mand idos own a plant called "Pto. Real", in Vieques, as well as a railroad, cattle, te, belonging - to it. That they have planted sugar cane and made contracts with colonists for the 1922 harvest and for successive harvests. That if these canes are cultivated during the dormant season, i.e., during the first six months of 1922, they will yield 75,000 tons of cane, the value of which at the lowest conceivable price will cover the debts and expenses of cultivation and milling. That the aforementioned ladies and gentlemen acquired upon the death of Mr. Bird Arias all the rights and shares in the firm called "Hijos de J. Bird y León", established in Fajardo, which is dedicated to buying lumber, commissions, banking, cattle business, etc. That the aforementioned Central and properties belonging to it, as well as the interests and shares of the "Hijos de J. Bird y Leon" company have a reasonable value of "three thousand dollars". The fair value of "three million seven hundred thousand dollars", and that the receivables to be paid are as follows: debts secured by mortgage and other crop debts, $930,000, and an unsecured debt for $800,000, it being further stated that five of the defendants are minors, and that no lien can be constituted on said minors, unless the Court so consents, and for this reason, as well as because of the prevailing crisis, the defendants have been unable to raise the money for the completion of the milling. That by virtue of the foregoing, the defendants cannot devote themselves to the cultivation of the canes now sown for the next harvest, nor for the coming harvest of the 23rd, nor can they attend to the repairs of the machinery and conservation of the aforesaid Company, nor meet the current obligations of the house of "Hijos de J. Bird & Sues,"which has unsecured assets, part of it being covered by an overdue and unpaid promissory note, which money is owed for tools, fixtures, salaries of employees, the said defendants being consequently without money or means with which to meet such debts and the present inactive period. That the creditors of the defendants will request payment of their debts, and will file numerous lawsuits for the seizure of their possessions (Cestmtta "ta ¡agía* 8.) Vapor "Lake Flournoy*' - Should arrive in Aguadilla on the 10th of this month, continuing on to the ports of Arecibo and San Juan. Steamship "Lake Elmdale" Is loading at the ports of Beaumont, Houston and Galveston, for those of Puerto Rico. Order your shipments as usual on this line. Villar & Company Inc. Calle del Depósito No. 2. Tel 347. San Juan, P. R.
NUMBER 737.
i $10,000 bond is posted for the alleged bomb thrower.
. After many inquiries made by policeman Jose Cedeno, who acted according to instructions given by the active prosecutor Diaz Collazo, was arrested yesterday morning the railroad striker Juan Rivera Franco, who is accused of having thrown the bomb in Talleres. Yesterday morning appeared before the prosecutor Diaz Collazo the accused Vera and the witnesses for the prosecution, Amparo Virnet and Mario Baura, who resided in a room next to the one occupied by the accused in the neighborhood of Talleres. Both witnesses contribute a great *prneba, that induces the public ministry to accuse Rivera as presumed author of the attack against the establishments of the Company of the railroad. It was called to declare, firstly, Mario Bauzá, who declared *1 prosecutor Díaz Collazo, among other things, that one day Rivera had invited him so that they went to the bridge of "The 20 meters", in San Patricio, to place a dynamite cartridge and to make it fly. Bauzá confesses that he energetically rejected what was proposed to him, believing it to be an action contrary to his way of feeling and thinking. Then the witness abounded in other accusations, in our opinion, against the accused, who remained seated in front of the declarant, apparently calm. It is then called Amparo Virnet, I lover of Bauzá. This woman, among other statements, told the Prosecutor that 10 or 15 minutes before the bomb exploded in Talleres, the individual Rivera had arrived at his house, in order to retire to rest. Qne as soon as the detonation sounded, the accused told him Qne will turn off 1* light, to avoid qne the police would * suspect him and arrest him;.... The witness further states that in the early hours of the night of the event, she saw Rivera, who took some dynamite cartridges that he had hidden under the house and went to the street. That in those days she had seen Rivera very busy working on a piece of pipe, to which he had already covered one of the ends with a piece of wood. The woman ends up informing the prosecutor that both the mentioned pipe and a mask, which she says was Rivera's, were thrown into the fire by his wife, when the police arrested Je after the event in Talleres. Prosecutor Diaz Collazo, who has worked so hard to clarify the facts, ordered Rivora to be sent to jail, with a bail of $10,000, under the accusation of having violated article 506 of the Penal Code. At the indication of the said official, the guard Cedeño received orders to summon the defendant's wife, Rosa Ríos, and her brother, Eze quid Ríos, who also lives in the same house as Rivera, to appear today at the Prosecutor's Office. The accused, with whom we spoke - on his way to jail - denies the facts, saying that he is innocent. The courts, in whose hands the matter lies, will have the last word. The Thrilling Drama ' SINNER OF LOVE ' - by the famous artist DOROTHY DALTON ( CURRENT PRICES Tomorrow Sunday THE LION AND THE SHEEP or THE GREAT REVENGE I by the beautiful actress BILLIE RHODES CURRENT PRICES 1
Timbers Having begun to receive the cheap timbers which - we have purchased after the downturn in the market, we are in - a position to offer our clientele prices without compe- - tence. . ■ ABOY VIDAL & CO. SAN JUAN.