ELAfflNDO
- pages 3 ctva. Semester, $4*00 A affo¿7.50
Offices; i Salvador Brau, tí i Tal. 833 P ( O. Box 348 1
MORNING DAILY, '
EXCEPT SUNDAYS
YEAR IV.
The Governors not having yet returned is proof of the triumph of the Commission-says Mr. de Paula Acuña.
Yesterday, while we were walking down the street in the company of the venerable patrician Don Francisco de Paula Acuña, we asked the latter several questions about the political situation. Mr. de Paula Acuña told us that, being sick lately, it has not been possible for him to exchange pressures with the politicians during these days, so the only news he knows are those given daily by the newspapers. Nevertheless, the distinguished gentleman informed us that his personal opinion on the matter is that the commission which went to Washington has succeeded in its purposes, being a proof of this the delay in the return of Governor Reily, who would already be back in Puerto Rico, if something, of which he was unaware, did not keep him away. Mr. de Paula Acuña assures that the triumph of the commission seems to have been splendid, ignoring, however, to what extent it has reached. In any case, Mr. de 'Paula Acuña assured us that by February 12, the date on which the Senate will open in executive session, everything will have been favorably settled for the interests and general welfare of both countries. WE ARE GONNA ATROPHY OUR TONGUE-DUO EL SR. TRAVIESO We approached Mr. Travieso, who at the corner of Gonzalez Fadin esTüeraba et trole, .... ~~ -Ledo, and what do you say about THAT? -we said, underlining the word. Needless to say that the worthy Commissioner, understanding our intention, went ahead to say: -On the political situation, nothing can be said about the "Three Flags" Cinema. Episode of the extraordinary series "BL IRON MAN" by WILLIAM DUNCAN accompanied by the interesting drama in 5 reels i "THE TOWER OF JEWELS" by CORINE GRIFFITH VEALA- CURRENT PRICES-- . VEALA
i do tell you again. I think you must be as well aware of everything as one. Besides, an absolute reserve has been adopted, for currency. Nobody wants to talk. I think that if we go on like this our tongues will atrophy. -Do you think Alegria's tongue will atrophy, too? ' ■ 1 I 11 ■ Don Martín, smiled ..... Then, raising his shoulders -a peculiar gesture for him- he exclaimed: -Well, ..... To him, perhaps not. Alegria is the happiest man on earth, and ..... The arrival of the electric car broke our conversation with Don Martin, without him finishing telling us why Alegria is, according to him, a happy man. A TRANSACTION WAS INTENDED WITH MR. HONORÉ During the conflict that arose due to the request made by Mr. Toro Labarthe to Ledo. Honoré, in order for him to tender his resignation as Chief of the Labor Bureau, we are assured that on one occasion Mr. Toro Labarthe spoke with Mr. Honoré, upon seeing écte's abstinent insistence on not leaving his post in the Bureau's office, with the purpose of seeing if he could get Mr. Honoré to agree to an amicable compromise and to tender the resignation that had been requested of him. Mr. Toro Labarthe-according to what we are assured-when insisting with Mr. Honoré so that he would voluntarily agree to leave his position, let him know that he (Mr. Toro) would be confirmed in February by the Senate in his position as Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor. Then Mr. Honoré told him that, since he was not willing to work a single day under his orders after what had happened, he was willing to submit his resignation on February 15, and for the same to take effect in the event that it was true about the confirmation of Mr. Toro as Commissioner of Agriculture and Labor, and that he was not willing to work a single day under him after what had happened. Advt.
BEHN BROTHERS-Inc. (HOUSE FOUNDED IN 1906) - BANKERS - Í Berwind White Coal Mining Co. i Lancashire Insurance Co. WIHK UH / Compagnie Generate Transatlantique. \ Windward Islands Line-Pacific Argentine I Brazil Line La Veloce. CONDADO - Sale of plots of land. RF Esquina Tetuán-Tanca. SAN R.
SURPRISING REDUCTION See our new price list for solid tires and you'll be amazed. what a bargain! WHO DOESN'T HAVE A TRUCK! The Fisk Tire Store ADRIAN NELSON DISTRIBUTOR
11 raolUSM and diatnbaMS and* pemil (Be. SOI) "nthoriMÍ bj U>. A<n at ertobet O. ISIS, os til u thi Poet Otaos el 0 I San Juan, Porto Rico. By order of the President, A. 8. Bor leeon. Poetmaeter General. Batered aa second elaaa setter, | ItbiW "1. 1"18, at the Port Office at 8m Joan, Porto Woo, United Stet* of fi "erl "e and* the Árt of teareh ". l>Vt |
U.S. Congress faces an enormous task.
- (UNITED PRESS) WASHINGTON, Jan. 6.- The United States Congress resumed its session yesterday, adjourned for Christmas and New Year's Day. The session opened at half past ten o'clock and as several members of the Conference on Disarmament entered the hall there was loud applause. The President of the French Delegation, Mr. Sarraut, took a seat among the journalists and Mr. Schazaer, of the Italian Delegation, went to sit in one of the seats set aside for foreign visitors. The Secretary of the Senate read out several projects and then went on to the order of the day. The case of Senator Newberry, from Michigan, who claims his right to sit in the senatorial seats, as a legislator duly elected by popular vote, is brought up for discussion. There was an attempt on the part of Senator Ber. ckam to adjourn the discussion relative to this matter, but the proposition died in rulings of the committee charged with studying it. The debates were limited to one hour only and turns were called for by Senators Borah and La Foliete, who favor and lead the fight to keep Senator Lorrimer in office. The first to speak was Senator Borah, who only asked the Congressmen to refrain from making judgments or comments until the presentation of charges was concluded, and further proposed that in view of the importance of the discussions the matter be reserved for later sessions of Congress. Thus, the motion was approved and the hearing of the Newberry case was postponed until Monday. Senator Borah's purpose, according to statements made yesterday, is to force Senator Newberry to defend himself before the special committee of Congress or before the full Senate. This is the view of the Republi(Oentinua ea. p. 3*.) Preparations to receive the Prince of Wales (UNITED PRESS) TOKYO, Jan. 6. - The Japanese Government is arranging pompous festivities to receive the Prince heir to the Crown of England whose visit is announced for next April. The Emperor Hirohito has ; wished to anticipate the festivals which* i in honor of the Prince have announced. ¡ I numerous Societies and Organizations : of the Empire and has yesterday promulgated an i order, according to which all children ; in schools are to learn the le- - tra and music of the English national anthem ■ "God Save the King," in order to receive triumphantly the Prince of Wales ; on his arrival in this Capital and on the ; excursions he makes through the Im : perium. Since yesterday all the public schools comprising more than ten million children have begun to sing "Save the King" and the enthusiasm which reigns is delirious. The visit of the Prince of Wales is interpreted here as a means of strengthening relations between Japan and England, and in various parts of the country announcements have already been made announcing the royal visit of the heir to the English Crown. LUNA CINEMA Today, matinee and evening. Premiere of the first day of the colossal cinematic novel, entitled: I "JUDEX" Do not miss any day of this interesting film. It is the hit of the season. Run to the LUNA Cinema. Current prices.
Tomorrow Fregolino debuts at the "Rialto".
-
The Si. Domenech has already prepared the proposals to be presented to the Municipality of San Juan.
Don Manuel V. Domenech, manager of the Porto Rico Railway Light and Power Co., speaking to one of our editors, regarding the matter that has arisen in connection with the intention of the municipality of this capital city to build a municipal electric plant for lighting the San Juan street lights.In this regard, speaking to one of the editors, regarding the matter arising from the intention of the municipality of this capital to build a municipal electric plant for the lighting of the city, he made the following statements in relation to the agencies that are making efforts to reach an agreement between the Company and the municipality before the construction of said electric plant is agreed upon: "As you know," said Mr. Manuel de la Cruz, "we are aware of the fact that we are not in the process of building the plant, but we are in the process of building it. As you know," said Don Manuel, "a commission of representatives of the municipality was appointed some time ago for the purpose of, together with others from our Company, reaching a mutual agreement regarding the price of the lighting so that we could then dispense with the new plant and continue using the electric power supplied by our company. "The commission, however, had not met for some time, because I had as yet no definite figures or proposals to make to the representatives of the Municipality." I am studying the settlement," Mr. Domenech continued, "and I have come to the conclusion (which I was unaware of until now) that the prices paid by San Juan for its lighting are excessively cheap. As an example I could cite the fact that the city of Fonce, which has less lighting than half that of San Juan and its barrios, pays $23,000 a year and San Juan for all the electric power it consumes pays a mere $44,000. ' ' a "I proposed a good way to save 5 <M0 dollars or more a year. Not only this Administration, but the previous one, in order to please friends and influential people in local politics, installed large lamps to light their homes and sometimes even the yards of their homes. Thus you will see in unimportant streets an extraordinary excess of lighting, while other more important ones remain materially to the priests. When I made this proposal to them, in the sense that they proceed to make a uniform installation without taking into account personal benefit but rather public necessity, I showed them that they could achieve the aforementioned savings of $5,000 or, if they did not want to benefit the municipal treasury with this surplus, they could use it for lighting in that part of Santurce that lacked it". -Then -we asked- Do you believe that the Company's preposition will be to maintain the present price of "the light? | -It is quite possible that we will propose a reduction in the same; but the dif(Oenttnfla on page S.)
TODAY SATURDAY IN FASHION Alma Rubens Montague Love, Pedro de Cordoba and Glass in the powerful drama in 7 acts "La Calumnia" or 'El Gran Galeote' Taken from the drama dekmismo non" bre of the distinguished Echegaray Repertoire ' ' ' Caribbean ' ' ' MANANA SUNDAY HERBERT RAWLINSON , in the drama in five acts " Defrauded Hearts" and Debut of the Great FREGOLINO Prices:-Matinee and Afternoon and Special Tanda, current prices For the Evening:-50 cts. seat
There is cordiality among the delegates of the nations taking part in the Cannes economic conference.
(By French Cable) CANNES, January 6.- The Economic Conference opened at 5:00 p.m. The first to enter the hall of the conference were the delegates. The first to enter the session hall were the French representatives, for whom there was applause. Lloyd George was the first to speak, greeting the foreigners and insisting that whatever may be the result of their work, the agreements of the Cannes Conference will necessarily have to exert a memorable influence on the future of the European nations. He said that for the Conference to bear good fruit it was necessary for all to accept the necessary sacrifices. The Minister of the Devastated Regions, Mr. Loubachier, spoke on behalf of Mr. Brland and said that the Conference should immediately study how to remove the apprehensions and fears that currently reign in Europe due to the economic situation that overwhelms it. He read an ex-] position in which he pointed out the need for a financial policy of economies which would erase the economic imbalance in the world. The United States representative and ambassador in Paris, Mr. Harvey, although only an official observer of his Government, made brief remarks to say that President Harding's Administration warmly associates itself with all the agreements of the Convention and that both it and his Government look forward to fruitful and fruitful work for the good of the whole world. A standing ovation greeted these words of the American representative, who then shook hands with Briand. Some newspapers emphasize the fact that Lloyd Geprge did not refer in his speech to Briand's proposed project of a "miííthr alliance, nor even to the two general principles on which the proposal is based.
THE GOLDEN GALLO He has just received an Immense assortment of silk and cotton fabrics, which he sells at prices never ready
"EL CONDADO" RESIDENTIAL PABQUE FOR SALE: HOUSES AND PLOTS OF LAND FOR CASH AND IN TERM In the best location in the Capital. The safest investment of your savings. Behn Brothers, Inc. Agents TETUAN esq. TANCA. SAN JUAN-
BEAUTIFUL WAREHOUSE ' 1,000 square meters: Six front doors. Suitable for Provisions business, effects of construction or storage. Located near the Malecon with railroad track on the front. Stop 2 1 /2. For rent in whole or in part. ANTONIO LEMA. Information: San Juan, P. R. DEL RIO & CO. INC.
French, on (the non-limitation of I naval armaments. The Conference hopes, however, that the alliance referred to will be brought to the attention of the Conference, after the economic affairs of the "European nations have been duly discussed. The fact that the economic campaign was intensified at the preliminary session of the Conference is also interpreted as a decided intention of the Representatives to bring to an early conclusion the main work of the Conference, which concerns the economic credit of Europe. JAPAN AIDING LENINE'S ENEMIES OTHER CHARGES COMING FROM THE FAR EAST...., WASHINGTON, Jan. 6.- The De. legation of the Eastern Republic of Siberia in this city has published a copy of the recent agreement signed between Representatives of the Japanese and the Siberian Government. The legation of the Eastern Republic of Siberia in this city has published a copy of the recent agreement signed between Japanese and anti-Bolshevik representatives, according to which the Japanese Government undertakes to give the anti-Soviet armies every assistance in their struggle against the Lenine Government. To get his Government out of trouble the Japanese Ambassador here has stated that the charges made by the Siberians are absolutely false and that they affect the faith of Japan I as regards relations with the "Soviets" of Russia. THE SITUATION BETWEEN PERU AND CHILE IS COMPLICATED SANTIAGO DE CHILE, January 6.- The Government of this Republic has decided Peru, in regard to the question of the Tacna and Arica. This decision on the part of Chile has complicated the situation and there is a strong desire on the part of Chilean diplomats not to reply to the notes sent by the Government of Peru.
SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO.
Eamon de Valera will soon retire from public life.
(United Press)) DUBLIN, January 6.- At the meeting of the Irish Cabinet Eamon De Valera announced that whatever the resolution adopted by Parliament on the question of the Treaty with England, he will retire from public life to devote himself solely to the defense of his family. OKUMA HAS DIED NEW YORK, January 6. - It is announced that Count Okuma, ex- ; minister of Japan, has died. In Washington, however, they have not yet received official confirmation of the news. AGAINST ASPHIXIANT GAS WASHINGTON, January 6.- One of the clauses of the Root resolution stipulates that asphyxiating gases should be suppressed in future wars, i The Naval Committee of the Conference on Arms Limitation adopted a resolution that any violation of the laws relating to submarines shall be considered an act of international piracy. The Supreme Council meeting here agreed to convene an international economic conference to which the European countries which fought against the Allies, Germany, Bulgaria and Austria, as well as Russia and the United States, will be invited. The Cannes Conference adopted, in principle, a "solution on the immediate initiation of effective action for the economic revival of Europe. %. MADRID, January 6.- The President of the Council of Ministers, Mr. Maura, announced that the Cabinet will study new terms for an understanding with France, with regard to the war between the two countries. With a considerable crowd, in which the small troop dominated, was exhibited yesterday morning the beautiful film THE NEWSPAPER SALESMAN, in the cinema "Rialto", which has obtained a resounding triumph, that must join the many conquered by him until now. During the above-mentioned exhibition, which was free of charge, approximately 1500 toys were distributed to poor children, which toys were purchased with the proceeds of the magnificent evening that took place on the 3rd in the evening. We are pleased to record it this way, not so much to avoid distorted interpretations, but to emphasize the zeal and seriousness with which the impresarios of that very crowded cinema are accustomed to manifest themselves. The toys also given to the children in the evening shows, were purchased from the house of "Guimbel", with money from the Company, which has received for its noble and generous behavior, many blessings from children disinherited from fortune and many congratulations from all the elements that are worth and mean the most in San Jijan Parque Borinquen El Cine a Orillas del Mar. TODAY SATURDAY Constance Talmadge in "Jugar con Fuego" (The Dangerous Business.) Luneta 20 c. Tomorrow Sunday: ''EL HOMBRE DE ACERO'' (The Master Man.)
SATURDAY, JANUARY 7, 1922.
NUMBER 890.